Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




LD 5 – Introduction to Criminal Law
  Identify the relationship among:
  1. Constitutional law
        a. Rules and provisions found in State and Federal Constitutions
        b. States may add to but not take away any of the civil liberties guaranteed by the
            U.S. Constitution
        c. Constitution / Bill of Rights
        d. Post facto law = the law must have been enacted before the alleged criminal act
            took place, meaning cannot charge somebody for a crime that was committed
            before the law was written
  2. Statutory law
        a. Written laws that are enacted by our legislative bodies and recorded in the
            various state, county or municipal codes
        b. In order for any law to be enforced it has to be in writing
        c. No crime if there is no statute
        d. All crimes are Statutory in California
        e. I.e., Assemblymen and Council, Education Code and Penal Code
        f. Post facto law = the law must have been enacted before the alleged criminal act
            took place, meaning cannot charge somebody for a crime that was committed
            before the law was written
  3. Case law
        a. Laws created from an appellate court decision by a judge
        b. Known as a precedent
        c. Case law… clarifies what the law actually means or establishes a procedure
        d. California trial courts must follow both states and federal appellate court
            decisions
        e. Ex: Miranda rights

  Letter of the Law
  -   Strictly applied, leaving no room for interpretation

  Spirit of the law
  -   Law is applied in accordance with the intent of the legislature, the promotion of fairness
      and justice and not solely in literal compliance with the words of the statue
  -   Officer discretion
  -   Penal Code Section 4
          o All statutes must be construed according to the fair import of their terms, with a
             view to effect its objects to promote justice
  -   Ex: Pregnant couple is in labor speeding in excess of 20 miles per hour, in the middle of
      the night but no traffic, gets stopped by an officer. Officer can let them go but advise they
      slow down instead of citing and holding them up.



                                 Criminal Law                     Civil Law

Definition                       Violations of a criminal         Non Criminal violations
                                    statute                         of the law

Violation terminology            Crime                            Tort; Breach of Contract

Prosecutor                       The State                        The Plaintiff

Purpose                          Punishment                       Redress



  Criminal Law
  -   Crimes committed against all of the people of the states of California
  -   Consequence of violating criminal law is prosecution
  -   Punishments include: death, jail, fines, removal from office or disqualification from
      holding office
  -   Ex: murder, rape, robbery

  Civil Law
  -   Non criminal violations of the law
  -   A civil wrong is called a tort
  -   Wrongs committed by one person against another
  -   Failure to comply with the terms of a contract, a breach of contract
  -   Seeks just compensation or redress – in simple terms, to right a wrong
  -   Ex: suing for falling on a wet floor, suing Micky D’s for giving me too hot coffee
  -   When officers are called for a civil law situation their duty is to stand by, preserve the
      peace and maintain order
  -   Ex: An officer could not force a tenant to pay back rent because the payment of the rent
      is a civil issue. However, if the landlord were to lock the tenant out of his apartment
      (without the proper court order) that would be a criminal law violation which the officer
      could enforce.
  -   Civil actions by crime victims: a person who has been injured as a result of a crime may
      also file a civil action even though the state files criminal charges
          o Ex: OJ case, state filed against OG, family filed against OJ for emotional stuff
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



  Statutory definition of a crime
  -    An act, committed or omitted, in violation of the law; forbidding or commanding it
  -    Penal Code Section 15
  -    Upon conviction, a penalty that provides the following punishments for the crime
          o Death
          o Imprisonment
          o Fine
          o Removal from office
          o Disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit in the state of
               California



  Basic elements common to all crimes
  -    Every crime or public offense, there must exist a union of an act and intent (a joint
       operation) or criminal negligence – Penal Code Section 20
  -    All crimes require a criminal intent which means a mental state or frame of mind that the
       person knowingly did the particular criminal act (break the law); it may be general,
       specific or transferred
                           1. The act of conduct
                           2. The individual's state of mind at the time of the act
                           3. The causation between the act and the effect, the result

Element                                  Further Explanation

Commission of a prohibited act           There must have been an illegal human act
  or an omission of a                       or omission, not an act resulting from
  required act                              natural phenomena

Presence of a designated state           Criminal intent must exist to distinguish a
   of mind (intent)                         crime from an accident or mistake of fact



      Basic elements required of an attempt to commit a crime
  -    Attempt to commit a crime consists of intent to commit the crime, but an ineffectual act
       to its commission
  -    Generally punished by ½ of what the crime would’ve been for regular punishment
  -    Ex: attempted murder, attempted manslaughter
General, specific and transferred intent crimes
  -   General intent: inferred from the mere doing of the act
         o Presumed and does not have to be proven
         o Ex: transportation of drugs, possession of marijuana, ex-felon in possession of a
              firearm
  -   Specific intent: not merely doing the act, but doing it with specific intent
         o The intent has to be proven
         o Ex: possessing drugs to sell it like having the drugs and a scale and little
              baggies.
         o Ex: dine n dash
  -   Transferred intent: unintended consequence of his acts, an unlawful act affects a person
      other than, or in addition to, the person it was intended to affect
         o Criminal intent is these instances is transferred from the intended victim to the
              actual victim
         o Ex: intending to conduct a drive-by and hitting someone other than the intended
              target

Criminal intent vs. Criminal negligence
  -   Criminal intent = the presence of a designated state of mind (not an accident or mistake
      of fact)
  -   Criminal negligence = negligence is the failure to exercise ordinary care; criminal
      negligence is a negligent act that is aggravated or reckless and constitutes indifference
      to the consequences
          o To not care of the results of the actions
          o Ex: heroin mom shoots up and falls asleep, leaves the balcony door open for
               baby to fall out a die = criminal negligence
          o Hard working mom watches tv and falls asleep with balcony door open, baby
               falls out and dies = freak accident
          o Ex: father knew heat would be 90+ degrees and still leaves baby in the car, baby
               dies = criminal negligence

  Three classes of a crime
  1. Felony
        a. Death sentence, prison (state or county), removal from public office or fine
  2. Misdemeanor
        a. Fine and/or county jail up to one year
        b. Laws of arrest of an officer cannot make an arrest for a misdemeanor unless the
            crime was committed in front of him. If the crime was committed in front of him,
            may arrest and if it’s the level of a felony, charge as a felony
         c. Wobbler means it can be charged as either/or a misdemeanor or felony, let the
            court/ DA / Judge decide; crimes that are considered to be wobblers are treated
            as felonies by law enforcement officers

  3. Infraction
         a. Fine only
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



         b. Citation in place of arrest
         c. Traffic citations, vehicle code and municipal code

  Three parties to a crime
  1. Principals
         a. One who either committed the crime or abided, abetted, advised, encouraged or
             gets another drunk or commands, threaten or compels another to commit a crime
         b. Primary persons involved in the commission of a felony or misdemeanor, all
             principals of a crime can be arrested and prosecuted
         c. A principal to a crime
                 i. Directly committed the offense
                ii. Aided and abetted in the commission of the offense
               iii. Advised and encouraged the commission of the offense
               iv. Counsel, advised, or encouraged children under the age of 14 years, or
                   mentally incapacitated persons, to commit the offense.
                v. By fraud, by contrivance, or force, occasioned the drunkenness of another
                   for the purpose of causing that person to commit the offense
               vi. By threats, menaces, command, or coercion compelled another to commit
                   the offense
        d. A principal need not be present during the actual commission of the crime
  2. Accessories
        a. A person who after a felony has been committed, harbors, conceals or aides the
           principal with the intent that the principal avoid or escape arrest or prosecution
        b. Has knowledge of the felony after the fact but still continues to help commit the
           crime
        c. There are no accessories to misdemeanor crimes
  3. Accomplices
        a. A co-principal in a case, legally liable for prosecution, a testifying witness at trial
        b. The snitch who starts as a principal but testifies against the other principal

  People legally incapable of committing a crime
  -   Penal Code Section 26
  -   Children under 14
  -   Mentally incapacitated
  -   Persons who committed the act or omission
          o Under ignorance or mistake of fact
          o Without being conscious of the act
          o Through misfortune or accident
          o Under threat or menace
LD 6 – Property Crimes 6 hrs
  I. LEARNING NEED
Arrest depends on the development of probable cause. Successful
prosecution depends on the collection of admissible evidence. Peace
officers need to know the elements required to arrest for crimes
related to theft, and to correctly classify these crimes as
misdemeanors or felonies.

A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony:

  1. Theft
       -   PC 484
       -   Crime Elements = the taking and carrying away of personal property of
           another without consent with intent to permanently deprive the owner
       -   Property = money, labor, animals, crops or real or personal items
       -   Real property = land and immovable property, affixed to or growing from that
           land, otherwise referred to as real estate
       -   Personal property = any movable object(s) owned by an individual; all property
           other than real estate
       -   Control = ability to exercise a restraining or directing influence over something;
           theft requires that property that is taken be under the control of the person it was
           stolen from, not necessarily the owner of the property and that control is
           transferred to the thief (lawful possession: someone’s vehicle that is not
           registered to them but registered to their parent or a bike who you let cousin
           borrow then report stolen, this is not theft bc cousin has had lawful
           possession/permission of it in past… possession must be revoked to be
           considered theft)
       -   With theft the intent to deprive must exist at the time of taking and not at a later
           time
       -   Either a felony or misdemeanor depending on the value or type of property
           stolen
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




       -




       -
     -
     -   Example: A person, intending to steal an overcoat from a clothing dummy in front
         of a store, removed the coat, but was unable to carry it away because it was
         fastened by a chain. Not having obtained control over the coat, there was no
         completed theft; however an attempted theft may have occurred.
     -   Example: A man took his personal computer to work. When he left, he took the
         company’s identical computer with him, thinking it was his. Since he believed that
         the computer was his property, this was not theft as the intent to deprive his
         company of property was absent. (If later decide to keep, then it is theft even if
         the taking at first was not intentional.)
     -   always contact the owner of the property, the owner of the property is the victim,
         the person who possibly has control at the time the property is stolen may only
         be the “reporting party”



2. Vehicle theft
     -   VC 10851
     -   Crime Elements = the driving or taking of a vehicle not the person’s own
         without consent with intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the
         owner of title or possession of such vehicle
     -   Felony
     -   A vehicle is a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
         or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power
         or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Vehicle Code Section 670)
     -   Need a VIN/ Serial # to be a 10851
     -   A suspect being charged with grand theft must have taken the vehicle with the
         intent to permanently deprive the owner - PC 487(d)(1)
     -   To determine if vehicle theft has been committed, ask the following:
             - The vehicle payments are up to date
             - The owner has received any warnings regarding late payments
             - The owner is involved in a family related dispute (e.g. divorce, child
                 custody, or support, etc.)
             - Family members often use the vehicle
             - Friends or family members have duplicate keys to the vehicle
     -   Example: A man picked up his girlfriend in a car he had stolen. He bragged to her
         how easy it was to steal the car. They took turns driving the car around until it ran
         out of gas and then they abandoned it. Both are guilty of vehicle theft since they
         both drove the car with intent to temporarily deprive, even if the girlfriend did not
         take the car.
3. Defrauding an innkeeper
     -   PC 537
     -   Crime Elements = the obtaining of food, services, or accommodations at a
         designated facility without paying with intent to defraud the proprietor or
         manager
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


           -   The crime of defrauding an innkeeper is a misdemeanor unless the value of the
               service is over $950 (then it is a felony).
           -   Example: A man spent the night at a hotel. He knew that he had only enough
               money to buy gas to get home, so he left without paying. The man committed a
               crime because he used the facilities and had no intent of paying the proprietor.
           -   Dine n dash:

Designated facilities, for the crime of defrauding an innkeeper, include:
   ● hotel
   ● inn
   ● restaurant
   ● boardinghouse
   ● lodging house
   ● apartment house
   ● bungalow court
   ● motel
   ● marina
   ● marine facility
   ● auto camp
   ● public or private campground
NOTE:
•Gas stations are not designated facilities. If someone puts gas and doesn’t pay, it’s petty theft

   4. Burglary
           -   PC 459
           -   Crime Elements = the entry to a building or specified structure with the
               intent to commit theft or any felony
           -   (force entry not needed, entry alone makes it 459, also doesn’t always
               mean they’re going in for larceny)
           -   Felony
           -   The entry does not have to be forced, as long as the unlawful intent is present,
               the entry can take place in any manner at any time.
           -   The intent to commit theft, or any felony, must exist at the moment the building or
               room is entered; the crime complete upon entry even if the intended theft or
               felony cannot be completed, the crime of burglary is still complete
           -   Without specific intent, the individual may have committed a different crime, such
               as unauthorized entrance or trespass but not burglary
           -   In commercial businesses, must be in closed hours to be burglary, when open it
               is 459.5 or 487/488
     -   Burglary of a vehicle occurs at the moment entry is made. In almost all cases, the
         vehicle (or at least the portion entered, such as the trunk) must be locked, so that
         the entry is forced. Pushing open the broken wing-window of an otherwise locked
         vehicle will suffice. If vehicle door is unlocked it is either 484(487/488)
     -   Every burglary of an inhabited dwelling, house, vessel, floating home, or trailer
         coach or the inhabited portion of any other building is burglary of the first degree
         and all other crimes of burglary are second-degree
     -   Specified structures, for the purposes of burglary, include the following:
     -           House, room, apartment, tenement
     -           Shop, warehouse, store, mill, barn, stable, outhouse, or other
         building (theft of a store must be during closed business hours to be a 459 the
         amount of the item does not matter, regular business hours is 459.5 and the
         amount does matter)
     -           Tent, vessel designed for habitation
                 Railroad car, locked or sealed cargo container, trailer coach (Vehicle
                 Code Section 635)
     -           Any house car (Vehicle Code Section 362)
     -           Inhabited camper (Vehicle Code Section 243)
     -           Motor vehicle when the doors are locked and the windows are rolled up
     -           Aircraft (Public Utilities Code Section 21012)
     -           Mine or any underground portion thereof
     -   Example: A woman knew that her boss owned several expensive coins and kept
         them at his home. While he was away on business, she decided to go to his
         apartment to steal his coin collection. She entered the apartment with the key he
         kept in his desk at the office. She went to the drawer where the coins were
         stored; however, they weren’t there. She quickly left the apartment. She
         committed the crime of burglary as she entered his house with the intent to
         commit a theft.
     -   Example: A man entered an apartment by the window with the intent to rape the
         woman who lived there. As he was sneaking to the woman’s bedroom, her
         doorbell rang. The woman answered her door and left with the person who was
         at the door. The suspect decided to leave and was caught by the security guard
         while climbing out the window. The suspect committed burglary as he intended to
         commit a felony (rape) when he entered her apartment, even though the rape
         was not completed.
5. Shoplifting
     -   PC 459.5
     -   Crime Elements = the entry to a commercial establishment with the intent to
         commit larceny during regular business hours the value of the property to be
         taken or intended to be does not exceed $950 … would be 487 if > $950.00
     -   Misdemeanor
6. Possession of burglary tools
     -   PC 466
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


       -   Crime Elements = the possession of certain tools knowingly making,
           altering, or attempting to make a key or other instrument to fit or open the
           lock of a building without legal request with the intent to break or enter into
           any specified structure for the purpose of committing any misdemeanor or
           felony
       -   Misdemeanor
       -   Specified structures, in relation to the crime of possession of burglary tools, can
           include houses, stores, warehouses, barns, and tents. (Penal Code Section 459)
       -   Specific tools that can be used for burglaries include, but are not limited to: pick
           lock, water pump pliers, slide hammer, slim jim, key bit, tension bar, crowbar, lock
           pick gun, screwdriver, tubular lock pick, floor safe door puller, ceramic or
           porcelain spark plug chips, vise grip pliers
  7. Possession of or receiving personal property with altered serial
     numbers or identification marks
       -   PC 537e
       -   Crime Elements = any person who knowingly buys, sells, receives,
           disposes of, conceals, or has in possession any personal property from
           which the manufacturer’s serial number or any other distinguishing
           number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered
           or destroyed
       -   The crime of possessing or receiving personal property with altered serial
           numbers or identification marks is a misdemeanor, unless the item is an
           integrated computer chip or panel with a value of $950 or more
  8. Receiving stolen property
       -   PC 496(a)
       -   Crime elements = every person who knowingly buys, receives, conceals,
           sells, withholds or aids in concealing, selling or withholding, any property
           obtained by theft or extortion
       -   If the person in possession of the stolen property is the thief, the correct charge is
           theft
       -   The crime of receiving stolen property is a misdemeanor if the value does not
           exceed $950. “Super strike”
       -   Mere possession of property that has been stolen is insufficient to prove the
           crime. The possession must be coupled with circumstances that show the person
           knew or reasonably should have known that the property was stolen or obtained
           by extortion. These circumstances can include:
       -   • the selling of property at an inadequate price
       -   • flight
          - • assuming a false name
          - • sale of property with identification numbers removed
          - • failure to account for its possession
          - • giving false testimony
          - • effort to throw away the stolen property
          - • inability to establish existence of person from whom property was received
  -   Example: A man stole $2000 in jewelry. He gave an engagement ring and a diamond
      necklace to his girlfriend and admitted that he had stolen them. When he was arrested,
      she hid the jewelry and claimed she never received them. The police obtained a search
      warrant and found the jewelry hidden in her apartment. She committed the crime of
      receiving stolen property because she concealed property known to be stolen.
  -   Example: A tourist was approached outside a department store by a man who offered to
      sell him a gold designer watch, normally priced at $3500, for $250. The tourist suspected
      that the watch may have been stolen because of the unusually low price, but he
      proceeded and bought the watch with cash. The tourist committed the crime of receiving
      stolen property because of the circumstances in which he bought the watch (inadequate
      price, not a reputable seller).
  9. Forgery
         -   PC 470
         -   Crime Elements = the intent to defraud, make, utter, publish, pass or
             attempt to pass, an altered, forged or counterfeit document or seal or signs
             an unauthorized or fictitious name
         -   The crime of forgery is a misdemeanor if the value does not exceed $950. “Super
             strike.”
         -   Documents used in the crime of forgery must be instruments that, if genuine,
             would have a legal significance. Examples of docs of this type:
                  - Deeds
                  - Mortgages
                  - Wills
                  - Lottery tickets
                  - Negotiable instruments (checks, money orders)
                  - Contracts
C. Describe appropriate peace officer actions when taking a report of
burglary or other similar property crimes
  -   Interview owner and witnesses
  -   Obtain vehicle related information
  -   Comply with mandatory reporting
          - Stolen vehicle: ensure entry into stolen vehicle system (SVS)
          - Upon recovery, ensure Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) and license plate
              match. Also, remove from stolen vehicle system
  -   Note vehicle contents - value that are not part of the vehicle
  -   Other: name of finance company and the account # or insurance information
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


- Investigative Report: Collect all available information necessary to write a clear
and accurate report. What, when, where, who, how and why.
- Initiate a crime broadcast if applicable.
         But before you take down a report make sure you:
         • Approach quickly and safely.
         • Make an initial assessment of the scene to verify a crime has taken place and the
         presence or absence of suspects.
         • Secure the crime scene and survey it with the owner/occupant to determine what was
         stolen.
         • Conduct victim/witness interview(s). Collect any possible evidence THEN write a clear
         and accurate investigative report.

D. Describe information that should be obtained when interviewing
the victim(s) of or witness(es) to a burglary
   ●   Obtain a detailed description of each item taken (e.g., identifying characteristics, serial
       numbers, etc.)
   ●   Determine who was last at the property and everyone who may have had access to the
       premises
   ●   Identify a time period in which the burglary may have occurred
   ●   Ask if the property was insured and, if so, for how much
   ●   Ask for names of persons the victim may consider to be possible suspects
   ●   Canvass the area for possible witnesses (e.g., neighbors, children, utility/construction
       crews in the immediate vicinity, store owners in the area, school officials, etc.)
   ●   Determine if witnesses:
          ○ observed any strangers in the area
          ○ saw any vehicles in the area that did not belong
          ○ were aware of anyone ringing doorbells or attempting to solicit anything in the
               area recently
          ○ heard any loud or unusual noises
          ○ know of previous burglary incidents
   ●   Identify other possible sources of information

 II. Learning NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required to
arrest for crimes related to arson, and to correctly classify these
crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.
A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony:
   1. Arson
        a. PC 451
        b. Crime Elements: Willfully and maliciously sets fire to or burns or causes to
           be burned or aids, counsels, or procures the burning of any structure,
           forestland or property
        c. Felony
        d. Example: A man was terminated from his job.That night he returned to the vacant
           job site and poured gasoline on the front door of the business. He ignited the gas
           and the fire burned half of the building. The man committed arson because he
           willfully set fire to a structure.
  2. Unlawfully causing a fire
        a. PC 452 - recklessly
        b. Crime Elements: Any person who recklessly sets fire to or burns or causes
           to be burned, any structure, forestland or property
        c. Felony
        d. Example: A woman was driving through a state park. She threw her lit cigarette in
           the dry brush, causing a fire. The woman committed the crime of unlawfully
           causing a fire by recklessly setting fire to the state park.
        e. 452(d) (misdemeanor)
              i.   Unlawfully causing a fire of property does not include one burning or
                   causing to be burned his own property unless there is injury to another
                   person or to another person’s structure, forestland, or property
             ii.   The accident scenario
  3. Possession of a flammable or combustible material
        a. PC 453(a)
        b. Crime Elements: possession or manufacture or disposal of a flammable or
           combustible material or substance or any incendiary device in an
           arrangement or preparation; with intent to willfully and maliciously use
           such material, substance or device; to set fire to or burn any structure,
           forestland, or property
        c. Felony
III. LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required to
arrest for crimes related to trespassing and to correctly classify these
crimes as misdemeanors.

  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



  B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor

  1. Unauthorized entry of property
       a. PC 602.5
       b. Crime Elements: any person, other than a public officer or employee acting
          within the course and scope of employment who enters or remains in a
          noncommercial dwelling house, apartment, or other such place without
          consent of the owner, owner’s agent, or person in lawful possession
       c. Misdemeanor
       d. Example: One night a woman entered her ex-boyfriend’s home through an open
          window and waited for him to come home. When he arrived, the woman began
          professing her undying love for him. When she refused to leave, he called law
          enforcement. She committed the crime of unauthorized entry of property as she
          did not have consent to enter his home.
  2. Trespass
       a. PC 602(m) (entering and occupying real property)
       b. Crime Elements: any person who enters and occupies, real property or
          structures of any kind, without consent of the owner, the owner’s agent, or
          the person in lawful possession
       c. Entering a vehicle is not trespassing it is 459 if forceful entry
       d. Misdemeanor
       e. Example: A homeless man found a vacant apartment with a broken out window.
          He climbed through the window and lived there for three months until the owner
          found him. He committed the crime of trespass (entering and occupying real
          property) as he occupied the real property without the consent of the owner.
       f. Example: A drunk man walks into a random house and falls asleep on the couch.
          The individual did not come in with the intent to commit theft/felony so it’s not a
          459 and the individual is not in public so it’s not a 647(f) - charge with
          trespassing.
       g. PC 602 (k) (entering land)
       h. Crime Elements: any person who enters any land, whether unenclosed or
          enclosed by fence for the purpose of injuring any property or property
          rights or with the intention of interfering with, obstructing, or injuring any
          lawful business or occupation, carried on by the owner of the land, the
          owner’s agent, or by the person in lawful possession
       i. Misdemeanor
       j. Example: Three teenagers followed one of their teachers home. That night, the
          teens climbed over the teacher’s fence, intending to spray paint the teacher’s
           house. The teacher ordered them to leave, when they didn’t the husband called
           law enforcement. The teenagers committed trespass (entering land) because
           they entered the land with intent to injure property and did not leave when
           requested.
        k. Example: Members of a nature activist group protested the cutting down of trees
           that housed a rare species of bird. They chained themselves to the trees in an
           effort to prevent the logging after being told to leave by the loggers. The loggers
           called law enforcement and had the protesters arrested. The protesters
           committed trespass (entering land) because they entered private land with the
           intent to interfere with the business.


IV.   LEARNING NEED

Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required to
arrest for crimes related to other types of property crimes, and to
correctly classify these crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.
     A.     Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for
vandalism
        -   PC 594 Vandalism
        -   Crime Elements: malicious intent to deface with graffiti or other inscribed
            material or damage or destroy personal or real property not their own
        -   Damage is $400 or more = Felony 594(b)(1)
        -   Damage is less than $400 = Misdemeanor 594(b)(2)(A)
        -   Two prior convictions for vandalism and has served jail time for one vandalism
            convictions = Felony 594.7
        -   Example: Gang members, wandering the neighborhood, spray painted their gang
            mark on sidewalks and walls of buildings causing $300.00 in damage. They were
            committing vandalism by maliciously defacing property.
     B.    Recognize what constitutes unlawful conduct in a
landlord/tenant dispute
        -   Landlords sometimes resort to unlawful methods in an effort to force a tenant to
            pay rent or vacate the dwelling
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




       -
       -   Even though the landlord may destroy his own property by removing doors or
           windows, the tenant has a property interest and acts of destruction constitute
           vandalism (PC 594) on the part of the landlord.




       -
     C. Recognize what constitutes a lawful repossession
       -   Goods sold under a conditional sales contract in which the title remains with the
           seller and the possession with the buyer may be lawfully repossessed by the
           seller
       -   Repossession occurs when the seller, a full time employee of the seller, or a
           licensed repossessor, recovers or takes back with complete control, goods that
           were sold under a conditional sales contract when the buyer fails to pay for them
       -   Peace officers have to determine whether a crime has been committed at the
           time of the repossession and do this by determining who has control of the
           property and whether any laws were violated during the repossession
       -   Crimes committed during a repossession dispute:
               - Vandalism - PC 594
               - Assault - PC 240
               - Battery - PC 242
               - Assault with a deadly weapon - PC 245
               - Disturbing the peace - PC 415
               - Drawing, exhibiting or using a firearm - PC 417
               - Trespassing - PC 602
               - Forcible entry - PC 418, 603
       -   Peace officers should establish the intent of the repossessor when considering if
           a crime occurred - the intent to steal or commit a felony is normally not present
       -   When receiving a call that property has been stolen, the officer should determine
           whether it was actually repossessed
               - Determine who has title to the property
               - Ask the buyer if he is aware that he is delinquent in payments
               - Determine whether the item is on the list of repossessed items reported to
                   the police
                   *** if the officer reasonably concludes that the property has been
                   repossessed, the complaint should be referred to the title holder
    D. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or
    felony


LD 7 – Crimes Against Persons/Death
 Investigations 6 hrs
     I.    Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the
           development of probable cause. Peace officers need to
           know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to
           injury, and to correctly categorize these crimes as
           misdemeanors or felonies.
 A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
 B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



       a. Battery
            i.    PC 242
           ii.    Crime Elements: willful and unlawful use of force or violence on the
                  person of another
                      1. Willful = implies a purpose or willingness to commit the act
                      2. Unlawful = means without legal excuse or justification such as
                         self-defense
                      3. Use of force or violence = in the context of batter means any force
                         or violence, the degree of force is not a consideration in the crime
                         and battery doesn’t require injury
           iii.   Battery causing/inflicting serious bodily injury means a serious impairment
                  or physical condition
                      1. Concussion, loss of consciousness, bone fracture, protracted loss
                         or impairment of any member or organ, extensive suturing serious
                         disfigurement
                      2. ***every battery contains the lesser crime of assault
                      3. Battery - Misdemeanor
                      4. Battery upon a specified person - Misdemeanor
                      5. Battery upon a specified person with treatable injury - Felony PC
                         243(c)(1)
                      6. Battery causing/inflicting serious bodily injury - Felony PC 243(d)
           iv.    PC 243(b) - Battery on a peace officer: Misdemeanor
                      1. Can only occur when the officer is engaged in lawful performance
                         of his/her duties and the person committing the offense must know
                         or reasonably know that the victim is a peace officer
                              a. Cannot occur in the course of an illegal arrest or an arrest
                                  involving excessive force because then it’s not lawful
                                  activity
            v.    PC 243.8 - Battery on sports official : Misdemeanor
                      1. Can occur when the person is engaged in the lawful performance
                         of their duties and the offender must know or reasonably know the
                         victim is a sports official
           vi.    PC 243.5 - Battery on school property
                      1. If a person commits an assault or battery on school property
                         during hours when school activities are being conducted, peace
                         officers may without a warrant arrest the person who commits the
                         assault or battery
                      2. *** an exception to the general rule requiring that the
                         misdemeanor was committed in the officer’s presence
   vii.    PC 243(e)(1) - Battery in a domestic violence incident: Misdemeanor
              1. Crime elements: force or violence against a: spouse/former
                 spouse, current dating relationship/former dating relationship,
                 current engagement relationship/former engagement relationship,
                 person with whom respondent has had a child, cohabitant
              2. Always make an arrest, even if the parties say they don’t want to
                 press charges
              3. Does not require physical injury just like 242
              4. For the purposes of DV, cohabitants means someone you’re in an
                 intimate relationship with, if they are just roommates then it’s a
                 242
   viii.   PC 243.4 - Sexual Battery: Misdemeanor/Wobbler
              1. Crime Elements: the victim’s or person’s intimate part is touched
                 without consent of the victim, and with specific intent to achieve
                 sexual arousal, sexual gratification, or sexual abuse.
              2. NOTE: For felony sexual battery, the victim must be unlawfully
                 restrained and the intimate part (either victim or person) must be
                 touched, meaning physical contact with the skin of the victim
                 whether accomplished directly or through the clothing of the
                 person committing the offense. Penal Code Section 243.4(f)
b. Assault with a deadly weapon or by means of force
      i.   PC 245
     ii.   Crime Elements: unlawful attempt, and the present ability to commit
           a violent injury upon the person of another by use of a deadly
           weapon or force likely to produce great bodily injury
               1. Deadly weapon = any object capable of causing death or great
                   bodily injury from the manner in which it is used
               2. Present ability = means the present capability to accomplish the
                   act of applying force
               3. Great bodily injury = means a significant or substantial physical
                   injury
    iii.   Not necessary that an actual injury result from the assault, however if an
           injury does occur additional punishments may apply
    iv.    Examples: throwing a hard object, kicking or beating someone severely,
           throwing someone against or off something
      i.   Example from Module 2 exam: Two guys commit a 417 on a subject and
           then officer hears BOLO and vehicle happens to be in front of him,
           conducts T-Stop that turns into foot-bail… driver points firearm at officer
           and OIS occurs. Was this ADW? Yes? Was this 148? Yes, delaying ofc
           Was this 69? Yes Appropriate force option? Yes
     v.    Felony
c. Elder or dependent adult abuse
      i.   PC 368
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


           ii.    Crime elements: any person who willfully causes or permits an elder
                  or dependent adult to suffer or inflicts unjustifiable physical pain or
                  mental suffering, willfully causes or permits the elder or dependent
                  adult to be injured or endangered, violates any provision of law
                  proscribing theft or embezzlement to the property of that elder or
                  dependent adult
                      1. Elder = person who is 65 or older
                      2. Dependent adult = between the ages of 18-64 who has physical or
                         mental limitations which restrict his or her ability to carry out
                         normal activities or to protect his or her rights




           iii.
            iv.

II. Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required
to arrest for crimes related to kidnapping, and to correctly categorize
these crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.

  B. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
  C. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
       a. Kidnapping
             i.    PC 207(a)
            ii.    Crime Elements: unlawful taking of a person against his or her will
                   by force or fear from one place to another.
            iii.   The movement involved in any taking does not refer to a specific
                   distance; rather it refers to whether or not the victim was exposed to
                   additional danger because of the movement.
            iv.    The force used to effect the kidnapping does not need to be physical
                   force. As long as the suspect gives orders which the victim feels
                   compelled to obey,
             v.    Felony
            vi.    Example: A man wanted to date a coworker. One day in the company
                   parking lot, he saw her next to her car which had a flat tire. The man
                   offered to give her a ride to the gas station. When she refused, he
                   grabbed her, shoved her into the car, locked the doors, and drove until
                   they entered another state. The man committed the crime of kidnapping,
                   since he forced the woman against her will to go with him.
           vii.    Example from Module 2 exam: Officer does a T-Stop, male driver is
                   intoxicated, female passenger has bruised eye and arm. Female has a
                   restraining order on male (PC 166 (a)(4)). PC is found on male subject for
                   this, however, not for PC 207. No element of being taking by force or fear
                   (although evident 242 or 273.5) and against her will bc she could’ve got in
                   voluntarily. Can vehicle be searched?
        b. False Imprisonment
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


             i.   PC 236
            ii.   Crime elements: the unlawful violation of the personal liberty of
                  another.
           iii.   Misdemeanor
           iv.    False imprisonment if accomplished by means of violence, menace,
                  fraud, or deceit, is a felony.
            v.    False imprisonment does not require that there be confinement in a jail,
                  prison, or other building. It can be accomplished by:
                       1. Restraining
                       2. Confining
                       3. Detaining
                       4. Compelling someone to stay or go somewhere without their
                          consent
           vi.    Example: A man lured his ex-girlfriend into his car and then locked the
                  doors to keep her from leaving. He would not unlock the doors until she
                  promised to meet him for a date that weekend. This is false imprisonment
                  because the man deceived the woman, and she couldn’t leave of her own
                  free will.
           vii.   Example from Module 2 exam: Driver pulls over and removes female
                  passenger with force and pushes to ground and takes phone (PC 211),
                  the removing of her from vehicle is not PC 236. Was search of the vehicle
                  lawful after suspect took off and was arrested.
          viii.   If someone is in your way, in a hallway for example, not allowing you to
                  leave a home is this 236?

       c. Child Abduction without custodial right
             i.   PC 278
            ii.   Crime Elements: every person not having the right of custody, who
                  maliciously takes, entices away, keeps withholds, or conceals any
                  minor child with the intent to detain or conceal from a person having
                  lawful custody
           iii.   Felony
           iv.    Child = person under the age of 18 years
            v.    Court order or custody order = means a permanent or temporary custody
                  determination decree, judgment, or order issued by a court of competent
                  jurisdiction. The decree, which can be initial or modified, must affect the
                  custody or visitation of a child, and must have been issued in the context
                  of a custody proceeding. Any order, once made, continues in effect until it
                  expires, is modified, is rescinded, or terminates by operation of law
            vi.    Example: A boy lived with his father who had legal custody, but the boy
                   still wanted to see his mother, the man’s ex-wife. The boy’s father decided
                   to allow the boy to visit with his mother and took him to the mother’s
                   apartment. When he came to pick the boy up, the mother refused to let
                   the boy go home with his father. The mother committed the crime of child
                   abduction without custodial right because she prevented the child from
                   returning to his father, the custodial parent.
            vii.   Example from Module 2 exam: Father takes baby and states he got in
                   argument with mom and drove off. This is not 207 it is 278 or 278.5
        d. Child abduction with custodial right
              i.   PC 278.7 - Good Samaritan exception to the prohibition against
                   detainment or concealment of a child from legal custodians.
             ii.   PC 278.5
            iii.   Crime Elements: every person who entices away, keeps, withholds,
                   or conceals with intent to deprive the other person of his or her right
                   to custody or visitation
            iv.    Felony
             v.    Example: Smith and her ex-husband have been divorced for years. Smith
                   had never liked the terms of their divorce granting them joint physical
                   custody on alternating weeks. Smith decided to take the children to
                   Europe for three weeks. Smith’s ex-husband told her she couldn’t
                   because the trip would interfere with his custodial rights. Smith told him
                   that he should talk to her lawyer and take the children to Europe. Smith
                   has committed the crime of child abduction with custodial rights.

III. Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required
to arrest for robbery, and to correctly categorize these crimes as
misdemeanors or felonies.
  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
  B. Recognize the crime classification as a felony
       a. Robbery
              i.   PC 211
             ii.   Crime Elements: taking of personal property of another from the
                   person or immediate presence against the person’s will
                   accomplished by means for force or fear
            iii.   Felony
            iv.    Immediate presence = means an area within the victim could reasonably
                   be expected to exercise some physical control over his or her property
             v.    Force = means the overcoming of resistance by the exertion of strength,
                   weight, power, threat or duress. Any force directed at a victim is sufficient.
            vi.    Fear = reasonable apprehension of danger to oneself or another
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


            vii.    Example: A boy was walking toward the entrance of his school wearing a
                    new school jacket. Two older boys stepped in front of him and demanded
                    that he hand over the jacket. The boy refused and tried to walk away. The
                    two older boys knocked him down, forcefully took the jacket off of him,
                    and ran away with it. By taking the jacket against the owner’s will, the two
                    older boys have committed the crime of robbery.
        b. Carjacking
              i.    PC 215
             ii.    Crime Elements: taking of a motor vehicle from the person or
                    immediate presence of a possessor or passenger by means of force
                    or fear with the intent to either, permanently or temporarily deprive
                    the possessor or passenger
             iii.   Felony and kidnapping while committing a carjacking is a felony.
             iv.    A subject has completed the crime of carjacking once he or she has
                    dominion and control over the vehicle. It is not necessary for the
                    possessor to be received from the vehicle for the crime to be committed.
              v.    Example: A woman was sitting in her car at a red light. The driver’s side
                    door was opened and a man pulled her from the car and drove off. The
                    man has committed the crime of carjacking because he forced the driver
                    out of the car and stole her vehicle.

IV. Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of
probable cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required
to arrest for crimes related to homicide, and to correctly categorize
these crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.
  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for murder
        a. PC 187
        b. Crime elements: unlawful killing of a human being, or a fetus, with malice
           aforethought
        c. Felony
        d. Malice aforethought distinguishes murder from the less heinous crime of
           manslaughter. Malice aforethought may be expressed or implied and is
           expressed when there is an intent to kill and implied when the state of mind has
           no intent to kill but there is a conscious disregard for life.
        e. PET PoLy = premeditated, explosives, torture, poison, lying in wait
        f. Felony murder rule = malice aforethought may be implied when any killing
           happens during the commission of certain felonies
            i.   Arson, robbery, burglary, mayhem, train wrecking, rape, carjacking,
                 kidnapping, drive by shooting
           ii.   If there is a killing of a person including suspects, whether intentional,
                 unintentional, or completely accidental, during the commission or
                 attempted commission of one of these felonies, that killing will be a
                 murder by operation of the felony murder rule.
B. Recognize the crime elements and classification for manslaughter crimes
      a. PC 192 - voluntary manslaughter
            i. Crime Elements: the unlawful killing of a human being without
               malice(intention/desire to do evil),upon a sudden quarrel or heat of
               passion
           ii. Felony
          iii. Heat of passion = implies blinding rage which clouds judgment and
               common sense and prompts a person to act rashly without deliberation.
          iv.  Example: A husband came home unexpectedly in the middle of the day.
               He walked into his bedroom and found his wife in bed with his best friend.
               The husband got his gun out of the bedroom closet and killed the man.
               The husband has committed the crime of voluntary manslaughter
               because he killed his friend in the heat of passion.
      b. PC 192(b) - involuntary manslaughter
            i. Crime Elements: in the commission of an unlawful act not
               amounting to felony or in the commission of a lawful act which
               might produce death in an unlawful manner, or without caution or
               circumspection.
           ii. Felony
          iii. Example: A man was in his suburban backyard with a high powered rifle,
               practicing shooting into a cardboard target. He hit the target, but the bullet
               continued into a neighbor’s house where it hit and killed the neighbor. The
               man has committed the crime of involuntary manslaughter because he
               didn’t take into account the safety of others (i.e., gross negligence) whose
               homes were only a short distance away
      c. Vehicular manslaughter
            i. Depending on the intoxication or condition of the driver, the level of
               negligence displayed by the driver.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




             ii.


V. Peace officers who are first to arrive at a scene involving a death
must be aware of their responsibilities to assess the situation, and
take an appropriate course of action based on their preliminary
investigation.
  A. Identify information that should be obtained and document when
     conducting an investigation involving the death of a child
        a. Manner of Death




        b.
        c. Preliminary investigation
      i.   Attempt to identify any signs that the child may still be alive and summon
           EMS/render first aid
     ii.   Treat the scene as any other death investigation, a complete inquiry into
           the circumstances surrounding the death of a child is essential in order to
           separate incidents of natural or accidental death from forms of criminal
           misconduct
d. Interview Techniques
      i.   Examples of possible open-ended questions include, but are not limited
           to, the following:
                1. What happened?
                2. Who found the child? Where?
                3. What did that person do when the child was found?
                4. How was the child behaving earlier today?




e.




f.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




       g.




       h.
       i. Identify information that should be obtained and document when
            conducting an investigation involving the death of a child
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




  B. Identify indicators that a child's death may be due to sudden infant death
     syndrome
        a. SIDS or “crib death” is defined as the sudden death of an infant which remains
           unexplained after a complete”
               i.  Postmortem examination and autopsy
              ii.  Law enforcement investigation
             iii.  Review of the child’s medical history
        b. No known explanation for SIDS
               i.  Not caused by suffocation, aspiration or regurgitation
              ii.  Not caused by child abuse
        c. Indicators of SIDS
               i.  Was under the ages of 1 year (majority of SIDS deaths occur before six
                   months with the largest number of deaths occurring between the ages of
                   two to four months
              ii.  Appeared to have been healthy prior to the death (with the exceptions of
                   minor colds, vomiting, diarrhea, etc)
             iii.  Died during a period of sleep
             iv.   Had no visible signs of trauma or injury at the time of death
  C. Identify appropriate actions for responding officers interacting with parents
     or caregivers involved in a SIDS Incident
        a. If it is determined the cause of death is SIDS, officers should reassure parents
           and caregivers that:
               i.    There was nothing a parent, caregiver or even physician could have done
                     to predict or prevent the child’s death
              ii.    SIDS is not contagious to other children
             iii.    Death occurs quickly and quietly
LD 8 – General Criminal Statutes 2hrs
 I.   Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable
      cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required to arrest for crimes
      related to disorderly conduct and to correctly categorize these crimes as
      misdemeanors or felonies.
         A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
         B. Recognize the crime classifications as a misdemeanor or felony:
            1. Lewd conduct, Penal Code Section 647(a) states: Who solicits anyone to
             engage in or who engages in lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in
             any place open to the public or exposed to public view.
             NOTE: No skin-to-skin contact is required. Touching can be through clothing.
             To arrest a subject for the crime of lewd conduct, the necessary crime elements
             include:
             • any person who solicits or engages
             • in lewd conduct
             • in a public place: (any area that is accessible to the general public such as a
             park, street, building open to the public, movie theaters, department stores, or
             public offices.)
             • or a place open to public view (means an area that can be seen by others.)
             Classification Lewd conduct is a misdemeanor.

             Extra: To understand the crime of lewd conduct, peace officers need to become
             familiar with the following terms. Lewd conduct means the touching or soliciting
             someone to touch the genitals, the buttocks, or the female breast with the intent
             to sexually arouse, gratify, annoy, or offend. “Touching” includes the touching of
             oneself or another.
             Public view means an area that can be seen by others.
             Public place means any area that is accessible to the general public such as a
             park, street, building open to the public, movie theaters, department stores, or
             public offices.

              2. Invasion of privacy, Penal Code Section 647(j)(1): Any person who looks
      through a hole or opening, into, or otherwise views, by means of any instrumentality,
      including, but not limited to, a periscope, telescope, binoculars, camera, motion picture
      camera, or camcorder, or mobile phone the interior of a bedroom, bathroom, changing
      room, fitting room, dressing room, or tanning booth, or the interior of any other area in
      which the occupant has a reasonable expectation of privacy, with the intent to invade the
      privacy of a person or persons inside.

             To arrest a subject for invasion of privacy, the necessary crime elements include:
             • looking through
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


            • a hole or opening or otherwise viewed by means of any instrumentality into a
            private area
            • with the intent to invade the privacy of people therein
            Classification Invasion of privacy is a misdemeanor.

             Extra: A man climbed into a tree and looked around using his binoculars. He
     looked toward a nearby building and noticed that a window opened into a bathroom. He
     focused on the window and saw a woman taking a shower. He has committed the crime
     of invasion of privacy because he continued to look into an open window even when he
     realized it was a private bathroom.

            3. Prostitution, Penal Code Section 647(b).
            The crime of prostitution occurs when a person solicits another person or agrees
            to engage in any lewd act for money or other consideration.

            To arrest a subject for prostitution, the necessary crime elements include:
             • any person who solicits
            • agrees to engage in
            • engages in
            • any act of prostitution, or
            • some act is agreed to and done in the furtherance of prostitution
            Classification Prostitution is a misdemeanor.

            Extra:




            To understand the crime of prostitution, peace officers need to become familiar
            with the following term Solicit means to seek to induce or try to obtain.
            4. Loitering about a public toilet Penal Code Section 647(d):
       means lingering in or about any toilet open to the public for the purpose of
       engaging in or soliciting any lewd, lascivious, or unlawful act.

       To arrest a subject for loitering about a public toilet, the necessary crime
       elements include:
        • loitering in or about
       • any toilet facility
       • open to the public
       • for the purpose of soliciting or engaging in
       • a lewd or lascivious or unlawful act
       Classification Loitering about a public toilet is a misdemeanor.

           (1) A man stood inside the men’s room at the local amusement park. He
               eyed each man as he came into the bathroom. The man would walk up to
               each man and stare at the man’s genitals as he urinated saying, “Can I
               help you with that?” The man has committed the crime of loitering about a
               public toilet to engage in a lewd act by watching men go to the bathroom.
           (2) A man stood outside a public restroom. Every time a woman walked past
               him he offered to engage in oral sex. The man has committed the crime of
               loitering about a public toilet because he was soliciting a lewd act.

       5. Public intoxication, Penal Code Section 647(f): occurs when a person is
       found in any public place under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any drug,
       controlled substance, or toluene to the extent that he or she cannot care for his or
       her own safety or the safety of others or is obstructing any street, sidewalk, or
       public way.
       To arrest a subject for public intoxication, the necessary crime elements include:
        • any person in a public place
       • under the influence of alcohol or drugs, and who
       • is unable to care for his or her own safety or the safety of others or is
       obstructing a public way
       Classification Public intoxication is a misdemeanor.

       NOTE:
       - Public intoxication does not require either field sobriety tests or chemical tests.
       - Penal Code Sections 647(f) and 647f are different penal code sections.

       6. Obstruction of a public way Penal Code Section 647(c): occurs when a
       person willfully and maliciously obstructs the free movement of another person
       on any street, sidewalk, or other public place.

To arrest a subject for obstruction of streets, sidewalks, or other public way, the
necessary crime elements include:
 • any person who willfully and maliciously
 • obstructs the free movement of any person
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


       • on any public way
       Obstruction of any public way is a misdemeanor.

       e.g: A group of teenagers gathered at the corner of a busy downtown intersection with a
       lot of pedestrian traffic. They refused to move out of the way so that other people could
       walk past them. The pedestrians were forced to step into the street to walk around the
       group. The group has committed the crime of obstructing a public way because they
       prevented people from using the sidewalk.

       7.Prowling, Penal Code Section 647(h): is when a person loiters, prowls, or wanders
       upon the private property of another, at any time, without visible or lawful business with
       the owner or occupant.

To arrest a subject for prowling, the necessary crime elements include:
• any person who loiters, prowls, or wanders
 • on private property of another, at any time
• without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant

Loiter means to delay or linger without a lawful purpose for being on the property and for the
purpose of committing a crime as opportunity may be discovered.

NOTE: The owner or occupant does not have to be present.

Classification Prowling is classified as a misdemeanor.
A woman who does not live at or know the occupants of a residence enters the backyard
looking for something of value to steal.

8. Peeping, Penal Code Section 647(i): is when a person, while loitering. prowling, or
wandering upon private property, peeks in the door or window of any inhabited building or
structure and has no visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant.

       To arrest a subject for peeping, the necessary crime elements include:
       • loitering, prowling, or wandering
        • on the private property of another, at any time
       • peeking in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure
       • without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant

       NOTE: Peeping must meet all the elements of prowling (Penal Code Section 647(h) in
       addition to violating the elements related to peeping.
      Classification Peeping is classified as a misdemeanor


II.   Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable
      cause. Peace officers need to know the elements required to arrest for crimes
      related to public nuisance and to correctly categorize these crimes as
      misdemeanors.

  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
  B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor

         a. Disturbing the peace Penal Code Section 415: occurs when a person’s activity
            causes unlawful fighting, making loud or unreasonable noises, or using offensive
            words.
               1. The crime of unlawful fighting is when a person unlawfully fights in a
                   public place or challenges another person in a public place to fight. Penal
                   Code Section 415(1)
               2. The crime of making loud and unreasonable noise is when a person
                   maliciously and willfully disturbs another person by loud and
                   unreasonable noise. Penal Code Section 415(2).
               3. The crime of using offensive words is when a person uses offensive
                   words in a public place which are inherently likely to provoke an
                   immediate violent reaction. Penal Code Section 415(3).

      To arrest a suspect for disturbing the peace, the necessary crime elements include:




             Classification Disturbing the peace is a misdemeanor.

             First Amendment rights and use of offensive words
             Words, shouting, or cheering that are intended to express ideas are considered
             communication. These ideas are protected under the First Amendment to the
             U.S. Constitution which guarantees the right to freedom of speech.

             The utterance of offensive words must be “inherently likely to provoke an
             immediate violent reaction” based on the circumstances then present. This
             reaction applies to anyone, including peace officers.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



             It is necessary for reports to illustrate the circumstances in which the utterance
             was made. Any violent reaction which did not occur as a result of the utterance
             should be explained.

             Determining a loud noise
             The chart below lists three factors to help the peace officer determine if noise is
             unreasonable




LD 09 – Crimes Against Children 4 hrs
 I.   LEARNING NEED
      To effectively carry out their responsibilities for the protection of children as some
      of the most vulnerable members of society, peace officers need knowledge of the
      crimes that may be committed against children. The ability to arrest and
      successfully prosecute depends on the development of probable cause. Peace
      officers must know the elements required to prove these crimes and to correctly
      categorize them as misdemeanors or felonies.

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
  B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony:
        1. Child harm, injury, or endangerment
              a. PC 273a
      b. Crime Elements: any person willfully causing or permitting any child to
         suffer, or inflicting unjustifiable physical pain or mental suffering or having
         the care or custody of any child and willfully causing or permitting that
         child to be placed in which a situation that his or her person or health is
         endangered
      c. NOTE: This is a general intent crime. Even though willfulness is an
         element, specific intent to harm, injure, endanger, or cause suffering is not
         a required element of this crime. It may be sufficient to prove criminal
         negligence.
      d. Permitting means allowing the situation to happen.
      e. Misdemeanor / Felony depending on circumstances/conditions
      f. Example: A mother left her infant in an unventilated vehicle on a 90-
         degree day while she ran into the supermarket. She has committed the
         crime of child harm, injury, or endangerment.
      g. Example: A father left dangerous drugs in an area accessible to a child.
         He has committed the crime of child harm, injury, or endangerment.
      h. Example: An adult babysitter was angry at the 7-year-old for whom she
         was caring. She punished him by making him stand in a closed closet
         knowing he was afraid of the dark. She has committed the crime of child
         harm, injury, or endangerment.
2. Physical abuse of a child (corporal punishment or injury of child)
      a. PC 273d(a)
      b. Crime Elements: any person who willfully inflicts upon any child, any cruel
         or inhuman, or corporal punishment or an injury, resulting in a traumatic
         condition
      c. Felony
      d. It is not the intent of the criminal justice system to prevent parents from
         engaging in reasonable physical discipline of their children. It is
         considered to be lawful for parents to reasonably discipline their children,
         including reasonable use of corporal punishment.
      e. General intent crime
      f. Corporal punishment = any kind of punishment inflicted on the body.
      g. Example: A father whipped his son with a belt with such force that the
         next day the school nurse saw redness and the outline of a belt on the
         son’s back. The father has committed the crime of physical abuse of a
         child.
      h. Example: An adult babysitter attempted to teach a child not to play with
         matches. She held a match to a child’s hand until a welt was raised. She
         has committed the crime of corporal punishment or injury of child.
3. Lewd or lascivious acts with a child
      a. PC 288
      b. Crime Elements: any person willfully committing any lewd or lascivious
         act upon or with the body of a child, with the intent of arousing, appealing
         to, or gratifying one’s sexual desires or those of the child, when the child
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                is under 14 (Penal Code Section 288(a)) or the child is 14 or 15 and the
                suspect is 10 or more years older than the victim. (Penal Code Section
                288(c)(1))
            c. NOTE: A sexual part need not be touched to complete the crime. The act
                must simply be sexual in nature with intent to arouse either the subject or
                the child.
            d. NOTE: It need not be bare skin that is touched. Touching through clothing
                can complete the crime.
            e. NOTE: It also includes victims being compelled to touch themselves.
            f. Felony
            g. Touching is required
            h. A lascivious act is any act which has a tendency to excite lust.
            i. A lewd act is one which is committed with a disregard of social
                constraints.
            j. Example: An adult female talked a 13-year-old boy into kissing her and
                then placed his hand on her breast. The woman has committed the crime
                of lewd or lascivious acts with a child.
            k. Example: A 35-year-old woman began to rub the penis of her daughter’s
                15-year-old boyfriend through his pants. She has committed the crime of
                lewd or lascivious acts with a child.
       4. Annoying or molesting children
            a. PC 647.6
            b. Crime Elements: any person annoying or molesting any child under the
                age of 18
            c. NOTE: This is a general intent crime. It is not necessary to prove that
                subjects intended to annoy or molest, merely that they intended to commit
                the annoying act.
            d. NOTE: Touching is not a required element of this crime. The offense can
                be words alone.
            e. Misdemeanor
            f. Felony under specific subsections
            g. Annoy = means to harass, disturb, or irritate, especially by repeated acts.
            h. Molest = means to make annoying sexual advances
            i. Example: An adult female made sexually explicit remarks to a 17-
                year-old boy about his body. She committed the crime of annoying or
                molesting children.
            j. Example: An adult male unlawfully entered a home and began to
                masturbate in front of a 4-year-old child. He committed the crime of
                annoying or molesting children. This is classified as a felony.
       k. Example: A teacher wrote nine sexually explicit love letters to a 13-
          year-old student saying she loved him and dreamed about him. She
          committed the crime of annoying or molesting children. Felony or
          misdemeanor classification will depend on prior convictions.

         Comparing lewd acts with annoying and molesting




5. Possession of child pornography
      a. PC 311.11
      b. Crime Elements: knowingly possesses, or controls any matter, showing a
         child under the age of 18 years, engaging in or simulating sexual conduct.
      c. Felony
      d. NOTE: Peace officers must remember that nudity is not necessarily lewd,
         and they should pay close attention to what is defined as sexual conduct
         by Penal Code Section 311.4(d). In the same way, nudity is not required
         for an act to be considered lewd or pornographic.
      e. NOTE: Penal Code Section 311.11(c) establishes that it is not necessary
         to prove that the matter is obscene in order to establish a violation.
      f. Possession = having domain, control, and knowledge of the object.
      g. Controlling = having power or authority to manage, direct, superintend,
         restrict, regulate, govern, administer, or oversee.
      h. Simulated = giving the appearance of something. Simulated sexual
         conduct means any act or pose that gives the appearance of being sexual
         conduct.
      i. Materials used
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                     i.Developed or undeveloped film
                    ii.Negatives
                   iii.Photocopies
                   iv. Filmstrips
                    v. Slides
                  vi.  Videotapes or laser discs
                  vii. Books, magazines, newspapers, or written material photographic
                       in nature
                viii.  Computer hardware or software including:
                           1. floppy discs,
                           2. data storage media,
                           3. CD-ROM players,
                           4. computer generated images, or
                           5. computer imaging equipment.
             j. Materials not porn
                   i.  Drawings,
                  ii.  Figurines,
                 iii.  Statues,
                 iv.   Any film rated by the Motion Picture Association of America,
                  v.   Live or recorded telephone messages when transmitted,
                       disseminated, or distributed as part of a commercial transaction,
                 vi.   Nudity alone may not constitute child pornography.
       6. Unlawful sexual intercourse
             a. PC 261.5
             b. Crime Elements: sexual intercourse, with a minor under the age of 18,
                who is not the spouse of the perpetrator.




       7.
              a. Sexual intercourse is any penile-vaginal penetration, however slight.
              b. Spouse is a person’s legal husband or wife.
              c. Example: A 25-year-old male had consensual sexual intercourse with his
                 family’s 16-year-old babysitter. He has committed the crime of unlawful
                 sexual intercourse.
                  d. Example: Two 16-year-olds were dating. They willingly engaged in sexual
                     intercourse. They have committed the crime of unlawful sexual
                     intercourse.

II. LEARNING NEED
The California Penal Code mandates that certain professional occupations follow specific
requirements for reporting suspected child abuse cases to the proper authority. Failure
to do so is a crime.

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
   A. Identify by category the professional occupations required to report suspected
      child abuse
          a. PC 11166 mandates that certain professional occupations are required to report
             suspected child abuse to the proper authority.
          b. These professionals include:
                 i.  child care custodians (including teachers and peace officers),
                          1. those working in public and private schools, youth centers, youth
                              recreation programs or organizations, child care facilities, foster
                              homes, group homes, residential care facilities, social workers,
                              probation officers, parole officers, peace officers, including peace
                              officers at schools
                ii.  health practitioners (medical and non-medical),
               iii.  employees of child protective agencies,
               iv.   child visitation monitors,
                v.   firefighters,
               vi.   clergy (except when in confessional),
              vii.   animal control officers,
              viii.  humane society officers, and
               ix.   commercial film processors.
   B. Recognize the specific law enforcement reporting requirements
          a. Once a reporter knows or has reasonable suspicion a child is a victim of child
             abuse they shall immediately contact a child protective agency by telephone
          b. A child protective agency means a county welfare department (e.g., Department
             of Social Services, Department of Child Services, Child Welfare Services), a
             county probation department, or a police or sheriff’s department. It does not
             include school district police or a security department.
   C. Recognize the required documentation when investigating crimes against children
          a. A report shall be prepared, written, and sent to the child protective agency within
             36 hours of the initial contact.
          b. A report shall be sent even if the child has died; even though the suspected
             abuse may not have been a contributing factor to the death.
          c. Fact information required for a written report:
                 i.  name and age of child,
                ii.  name of the reporter,
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


               iii.   location of child,
               iv.    nature and extent of injuries,
                v.    condition of child when abuse was reported,
               vi.    facts which lead to the suspicion of abuse,
              vii.    relationship to suspected abuser,
              viii.   nature of suspected abuse (i.e., sexual, physical, etc.), and
               ix.    history of previous abuse.
   D. Recognize a peace officer’s responsibility for maintaining the confidentiality of the
      reporting party
         a. PC 11172 states that anyone who reports a suspected child abuse incident shall
             not incur civil or criminal liability for any report required or authorized. This means
             that if a reporter files a report in good faith, he or she cannot be sued or arrested
             for the report’s contents (even if the contents turn out to be wrong).
         b. PC 11167 ensures that the identity of the person reporting a suspected child
             abuse incident shall be confidential (this includes the reporter’s employer).
         c. Only the following will have access to the reporter’s identity:
                 i.   Child protective agency investigating the case
                ii.   Counsel representing a child protective agency
               iii.   District attorney in a criminal prosecution
               iv.    Licensing agency when abuse in out-of-home care is suspected
                v.    Others pursuant to a court order

III. LEARNING NEED
Peace officers have the authority to make a warrantless entry into a home whenever they
reasonably believe a minor is in immediate danger of being physically abused, neglected
or sexually exploited.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Recognize the legal basis for entry without a warrant to protect a minor
         a. When peace officers receive information that a minor needs to be removed from
            the premises because the minor is endangered, but not in IMMEDIATE danger,
            the officers need to obtain a warrant. .
         b. Without a warrant or valid consent, peace officers may enter the premises ONLY
            when there are exigent circumstances.
  B. Recognize the exigent circumstances that could lead an officer to reasonably
     believe that there is an immediate threat to a minor
         a. People vs Brown
               i.    Little brother called the detective stating his sister was currently being
                     sexually molested by the father. The detective had been to the location 5
                      times prior and was informed by other officers that there have been prior
                      acts of sexuality. Based on the totality of the circumstances known to the
                      officer, it was reasonable for him to believe that a helpless female victim
                      was being assaulted. Therefore, it was reasonable for him to enter the
                      house without a warrant or consent to prevent or interrupt a serious
                      felony.
                 ii.  peace officer intervened based upon a reasonable suspicion of sexual
                      abuse upon an incapacitated victim.
                iii.  The victim’s right to physical and mental integrity outweighs the right of
                      the aggressor to remain secure in his domestic sanctuary.
          b.   Dawn O.
                  i.  the courts decided the facts reasonably indicated that an unattended child
                      (neglect) constitutes a substantial threat to his or her safety
                 ii.  The police officer entered the residence in an attempt to determine
                      whether there was another child alone in the house not for the purpose of
                      securing the residence.
          c.   People v Sutton
                  i.  A peace officer had to determine whether the child was under the care of
                      a responsible adult (endangerment of a minor in a private dwelling).
                 ii.  The court held that there is no special or different rule regarding
                      warrantless entries to the purpose of protecting infant children.
          d.   People vs Payne
                  i.  The court ruled that the officers’ warrantless entry into a private dwelling
                      was justified by exigent circumstances, which included prior reliable
                      information about the suspect.
          e.   People vs Miller
                  i.  The peace officer made a warrantless entry into a home to determine if a
                      2-year-old wandering in the neighborhood could be safely reunited with
                      his parents and siblings. The peace officer searched the residence with
                      the father’s consent and located explosives and other contraband.
                 ii.  The father moved to suppress evidence located in the house that was
                      found by the peace officer because he believed the warrantless search
                      was illegal.The court ruled that the exigency was clear. It was proper for
                      the peace officer to enter the residence “to determine if the parents and
                      siblings were home, if they were in need of assistance, and whether the
                      child could be safely reunited with them.”

IV.    LEARNING NEED
Ensuring the safety of a child victim is a peace officer’s primary responsibility when
responding to a case of suspected child abuse. To do this effectively, officers must be
able to recognize indicators of abuse, conduct a preliminary investigation into abuse,
and take the appropriate action.
    A. Recall the statutory definition of child abuse
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


        a. PC 11165.6 defines child abuse as: a physical injury, which is inflicted by other
           than accidental means, on a child, by another person.
        b. The statute further expands this definition to include other acts, such as:
               i. sexual abuse of a child,
              ii. neglect,
             iii. willful cruelty or unjustifiable punishment of a child,
             iv.  unlawful corporal punishment or injury, or
              v.  neglect or abuse in out-of-home care.
  B. Discuss physical and behavioral indicators of:
        1. Physical child abuse
2. Physical neglect of a child




3. Mental Suffering
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




       4. Sexual child abuse
C. Demonstrate effective officer actions for conducting an interview with a child victim of
abuse
   ● maintain control of the interview conditions/environment.
   ● take the time to build rapport and gain the child’s confidence.
   ● use communication techniques that are appropriate for the child’s age and maturity.
         ○ Use simple terminology and sit eye level with the child
   ● gather information regarding “who”, “what”, “where”, “when”, and “how many”.
         ○ Explain that the child is not responsible or at fault for what happened
         ○ If the child pauses for an extended period of time, encourage the child to
             continue by asking “And then what happened?”
   ● conclude the interview by explaining what will happen next.
         ○ Usually a forensic medical exam
         ○ Do not make false promises or create unrealistic expectations


LD 10 – Sex Crimes 4 hrs
  I.   LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of probable cause. Peace
officers must know the elements required to arrest for sex crimes, and to correctly
categorize these crimes as misdemeanors and felonies.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
  B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony:

   1. Rape PC 261 FELONY :

      To arrest a subject for rape, the necessary crime elements include:
      • an act of sexual intercourse
      • without consent of the person.

      NOTE: Sexual intercourse is defined as any penetration, no matter how slight, of the
      vagina/genitalia by the penis. Absent penetration = evaluate for an assault with attempt to
      commit rape (PC 220).

      NOTE: Verbal threats are not critical to a rape conviction. Threats can be implied from the
      circumstances or inferred from the perpetrator’s conduct.

      Example: A man knew the victim was intoxicated by drugs or alcohol and was unable to give
      consent. The man had penile/vaginal intercourse with the victim; the crime of rape was
      committed against the victim.
      Example: Because the victim felt physically threatened by a man she knew, she agreed to
      have sex with him to avoid injury, providing he used a condom. The crime of rape was
      committed.
          - PC 261.7 states that a victim’s request that a perpetrator use a condom or other birth
             control device does not constitute consent without additional evidence of consent
      Example: A man who had sexual intercourse with a woman who initially consented, but
      revoked consent during sex, committed the crime of rape, when the man did not stop when
      asked.

   2. Sodomy
         a. PC 286
         b. Crime Elements: sexual penetration, however slight, of the anus of one person by
            the penis of another person under the conditions outlined in the chart at the end
            of this section.
         c. Felony
         d. Example: A man who contacted, with slight penetration, another person’s anus
            with his penis, against that person’s will, has committed the crime of sodomy.

   3. Oral Copulation
            PC 287 FELONY:
           To arrest a subject for oral copulation, the necessary elements are:
           • the act of copulating the mouth of one person
           • with the sex organ or anus of another person,
           • without the consent of the victim.

           NOTE: Just touching the mouth to the sexual organ or anus of another completes
           the offense. Penetration is not necessary.

           Example: A man who forced a woman to kiss his genitals victim, by threatening
           to kill her family members committed the crime of oral copulation.

           Example: A woman who performed oral sex on an intellectually disabled man
           who was unable to understand the act, committed the crime of oral copulation.

4. Penetration with a foreign object
      a. PC 289
      b. Crime Elements: the use of a foreign or unknown object for purposes of sexual
         arousal, gratification, or abuse to penetrate, however slight, the genital or anal
         openings against the person’s will or causes another person to penetrate under
         the conditions outlined in the chart at the end of this section.
      c. Felony
      d. Foreign object = is any instrument, substance, device, or part of the body, except
         a sexual organ.
      e. Unknown object = includes any foreign object, substance, instrument, device, or
         any part of the body, including a penis, (if it is not known what object penetrated
         the opening)
      f. Example: A man who penetrated a woman’s vagina with the barrel of a gun
         against her will commit the crime of penetration with a foreign object.
      g. Example: A man who penetrated a victim’s anus with his fingers against the will
         of the victim committed the crime of penetration with a foreign object.
5. Assault with intent to commit rape and other crimes specified in PC 220 FELONY:
         Assault with intent to commit mayhem, rape, sodomy, oral copulation, rape in
         concert, lewd acts with a child, or penetration with a foreign object refers to an
         incomplete attempt to commit these acts.

           To arrest a subject for intent to commit rape or crimes covered under Penal Code
           Section 220, the necessary elements include:
           • assault
           • with specific intent
           • to commit mayhem, rape, sodomy, oral copulation, rape in concert, lewd acts
           with a child, or penetration with a foreign object.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


            NOTE: The crime of assault with intent to commit crimes identified in Penal Code
            Section 220 is complete if an assault is made and, at any moment during the
            assault, the perpetrator intends to commit one of the crimes listed in Penal Code
            Section 220.

            NOTE: “Rape,” listed in Penal Code Section 220, includes spousal Rape.

            NOTE: The terms, application of force and apply force, mean to touch in a
            harmful or offensive manner. The slightest touching can be enough if it is done in
            a rude or angry way. Making contact with another person, including through his or
            her clothing is enough. The touching does not have to cause pain or injury of any
            kind.

            Nuances of assault with intent to commit rape:
            Through questioning, evidence, behavior, admission, or a totality of the
            circumstances, peace officers must establish that the subject had specific intent
            to commit a specified sex crime or mayhem.

            Example: A man wrestled a female to the ground in a dark carport with intent to
            rape her. The headlights of an approaching car frightened him off before he could
            complete the sex act. The man committed assault with intent to commit rape.
            (Penal Code Sections 220(a))

            Example: A man restrained a male victim and pulled his pants off
            while stating his intent to sodomize the victim. The victim, however, was stronger
            and fought the man off. The man committed assault with intent to commit
            sodomy. (Penal Code Sections 220(a))


  6. Sexual battery
        a. PC 243.4
        b. Crime Elements: the victim’s or person’s intimate part is touched without consent
           of the victim, and with specific intent to achieve sexual arousal, sexual
           gratification, or sexual abuse.
        c. NOTE: For felony sexual battery, the victim must be unlawfully restrained and the
           intimate part (either victim or person) must be touched, meaning physical contact
           with the skin of the victim whether accomplished directly or through the clothing
           of the person committing the offense. Penal Code Section 243.4(f)
         d. NOTE: For a misdemeanor sexual battery direct touching of the skin of the victim
            or the suspect is not required. Penal Code Section 243.4(e)(2)
         e. Wobbler
         f. Example: A woman who placed her hand inside a man’s pants and fondled his
            penis without his consent committed the crime of misdemeanor sexual battery.
         g. Example: A man who pushed a woman up against a wall, reached into her
            blouse and fondled her bare breasts, committed the crime of felony sexual
            battery.
   7. Indecent exposure PC 314 FELONY:

       Indecent exposure is an act in which a person willfully and lewdly exposes
       his or her person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any
       place where there are present other individuals to be offended or annoyed thereby.

       To arrest a subject for indecent exposure, the crime elements include:
       • every person who willfully and lewdly,
       • exposes their private parts where there are others present to be offended




       Example: A woman who sneaked into a home and exposed herself to the occupants
       committed felony indecent exposure.

       Example: A man who approached a woman in a shopping mall, exposed himself and
       masturbated, committed the crime of indecent exposure. Classification as a felony or
       misdemeanor will depend on prior convictions.


II. LEARNING NEED
The manner in which peace officers interact with the victim of a sex crime may influence
the quality of information the victim is willing to provide. A positive contact will affect
the victim beneficially; a negative contact will adversely impact the victim.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Give examples of assessing a victim’s physical state in order to make them as
     comfortable as possible, and secure the necessary medical attention




         ●   While in some instances simply asking the victim, “Are you okay?” may prompt
             the victim to tell the peace officer about medical needs, peace officers should be
             aware that a victim of sexual assault is not “okay.” They have undergone a
             traumatic assault. “Are you okay?” may be interpreted kindly, or it may produce
             an emotional outburst in a victim.
         ●   Ask questions like “Are you injured? Do you need immediate medical attention?”
         ●   Compassion and professionalism are essential. A peace officer should assure
             the victim that they made the right decision to disclose/report.

   B. Describe common emotional and physical reactions victims experience and the
      pressures associated with reporting a sex crime
   C. Describe a peace officer’s own emotional and attitudinal reactions to sex crimes

       It is the peace officers’ job to remain objective. Peace officers should recognize that they
       cross the line into subjectivity every time they think, “If this had been me or someone I
       know.” No victim response should affect objectivity. Peace officers can be
       compassionate and still remain objective.

       Personalization is the act of putting oneself in the victim’s place. Peace officers should
       not personalize the crime when dealing with the victim. This crime did not happen to the
       peace officer; the peace officer is there to help. If peace officers personalize a crime,
       they have lost their objectivity

III. LEARNING NEED

To complete a thorough investigation, peace officers must be sensitive to the fact that
sexual assaults pose unique problems because of the emotional state of the victim, and
the complexity of the investigative procedures.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Discuss factors that set a positive tone for the victim interview
        a. make the victim as physically comfortable as possible; consider the best physical
           location and need for privacy.
        b. let the victim know that everything possible will be done to help.
        c. reassure the victim that it is understood that this is a difficult situation.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


        d. notify the victim that they can have a support person (family, friends, or advocate,
            depending on agency policy and resources) to be present during the interview.
        e. establish rapport and explain the investigative process and the need for asking
            the victim questions.
  B. Select questions to be asked during the victim interview
        a. Where did the crime occur?
        b. When did the crime occur?
        c. What was the appearance of the suspect (i.e., pants unzipped, naked)
        d. Did the suspect ejaculate?
        e. Did the suspect have an erection?
        f. Did the suspect wear a condom? If so, where was it disposed of?
        g. Did the suspect say anything? If so, what was said?
        h. Were any threats made? If so, what threat?
        i. Were any tools, weapons, or other objects used by the suspect?
        j. Can the victim identify the suspect?
        k. Is there a relationship with the suspect?
        l. To whom did the victim first tell about the assault?
        m. Did the suspect take anything belonging to the victim (or is anything missing)?
        n. Did you leave anything?
  C. Identify the purpose of a medical/legal exam
        a. The purpose of a medical/legal exam is to collect, preserve, and document
        b. evidence. The exam should be conducted if the sexual assault occurred within
        c. 120 hours or longer depending on the circumstances.
        d. The forensic exam may:
                i.  determine if there are physical signs of injuries.
               ii.  document the type and location of injuries.
              iii.  determine if there is evidence of recent sexual activity.
              iv.   determine if the physical findings are consistent with the time frame and
                    victim’s statement.
  D. Explain victim’s rights
        a. Penal Code Section 264.2 states that a peace officer, or their agency, must
        b. immediately notify the local rape victim counseling center whenever a victim
        c. of an alleged violation of specified sex offenses is transported to a hospital for
        d. any medical evidentiary or physical exam.
                i.  the victim has the right to have a sexual assault victim counselor and at
                    least one other support person of the victim's choosing present at any
                    medical evidentiary or physical exam and notice of this right shall be
                    provided orally or in writing to the victim by the attending medical provider
                 prior to the commencement of any initial medical evidentiary or physical
                 exam arising out of a sexual assault.
            ii.  Penal Code Section 679.04(a) allows a victim to have victim advocates
                 and a support person of the victim’s choosing present at any interview by
                 law enforcement authority, district attorneys or defense attorneys.
                 However, the support person may be excluded from an interview by law
                 enforcement if determined that their presence would be detrimental to the
                 purpose of the interview.
           iii.  Penal Code Section 264.2(b)(4) enables a peace officer or a medical
                 professional to exclude a support person from a medical exam if the
                 person would be detrimental to the exam.
E. Discuss the types of evidence to be collected from the crime scene, victim and
   suspect




F. Describe the services available to sexual assault victims
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




IV. LEARNING NEED
Penal Code Section 290 is intended to allow law enforcement agencies to track the
whereabouts of known sex offenders.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Identify the requirements for sex offender registration under Penal Code Section
     290
        a. Penal Code Section 290 states: “ Every person (convicted sex offender)…..while
            residing in California... or while attending school or working... shall be required to
            register with the chief of police or sheriff of the city or county in which they are
            living....” The requirement to register is for the period of 10 years, 20 years, or
            life.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


       Penal Code Section 290.011 states: every transient required to register as a sex
       offender who is physically present in a jurisdiction shall register every thirty calendar
       days. A transient is defined as a person who has no residence. They must provide a list
       of places where they may sleep, eat, frequent and engage in leisure activity.

       NOTE: A transient shall register within five working days of their birthday, even if it falls
       between the thirty day period.

       Penal Code Section 290.012 requires a sexually violent predator (SVP) to register every
       ninety calendar days.

      Example: A man convicted of sodomy must register annually within five working days of
      his birthday.
      Example: A registrant who has moved from Sacramento to Escondido must register
      within five working days with Sacramento and Escondido law enforcement authorities.
      Example: A registrant from Beverly Hills who is taking a two-week vacation in Fresno
      must register within five working days with Fresno law enforcement authorities.
   B. Recognize violations of Penal Code Section 290
          a. The following items can be considered violation evidence:
                  i.  Recorded witness statement (spouse, significant other, family,
                      roommate(s), neighbor(s), new resident(s)
                 ii.  Statement from suspect’s
                iii.  Mail with suspects address
                iv.   Rental receipts, utility bills


LD 11 – Juvenile Law and Procedure 3 hrs
  I.   ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must recognize their roles and responsibilities regarding the protection of
 rights of juveniles under ​California law.

​LEARNING OBJECTIVES
   A. ​Recognize a peace officer’s responsibility for the safety of a juvenile and the
       general public
          a. expressing the willingness to intervene in incidents involving dependents and
             status offenders,
          b. being alert to signs of child abuse, dependency and delinquency,
           c. expressing willingness to assist juveniles by providing protection, guidance and
              referrals to an appropriate agency or service, and
           d. taking the alternative that is least restrictive to a juvenile’s freedom of movement,
              provided that alternative is compatible with the best interests of the juvenile and
              the community. (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 307 and 626)
   B. ​Recognize the conditions when admonishment of a juvenile’s rights is or is not
       required
           a. Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625 requires that juveniles be advised of
              their legal rights when they have been taken into temporary custody without a
              warrant, if the minor:
                   i.  is habitually disobedient or truant,
                  ii.  violated an order of the juvenile court,
                iii.   violated a law or ordinance, or
                 iv.   escaped from a commitment ordered by the juvenile court.
           b. Juveniles subject to Welfare and Institutions Codes 601 and or 602 must be
              advised of their legal rights when they have been taken into temporary custody
              without a warrant.
           c. It is not required to advise juveniles of certain legal rights if they:
                   i.  have a history of being abused or neglected and are at immediate risk of
                       physical or emotional harm, or sexual abuse,
                  ii.  are at immediate risk because of their physical environment or lack of
                       adequate supervision,
                iii.   are hospitalized and release of the minor to a parent or guardian poses
                       an immediate danger to the juvenile’s health or safety,
                 iv.   are found in a street or public place suffering from any sickness or injury
                       requiring care or treatment, or
                  v.   are stopped for general questioning by an officer.
   C. ​Recognize the conditions when a peace officer must obtain a waiver of a juvenile’s
       rights
           a. “Prior to a custodial interrogation, and before the waiver of any Miranda rights, a
              youth 17 years of age or younger shall consult with legal counsel in person, by
              telephone, or by video conference. The consultation may not be waived. (Welfare
              and Institutions Code 625.6(a)).”

II. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must realize when there is an absence of appropriate parental care and
 control; the state becomes ​the parent and is responsible for balancing the needs of the
 juvenile with the protection and safety of the public.

   A. ​Recognize the sources of peace officer authority to take a juvenile into temporary
       custody
          a. W&I Code Section 305
                i.  has immediate need for medical care,
               ii.  is in immediate danger of physical or sexual abuse,or
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


               iii.    has been left unattended or is in a physical environment which may pose
                       an immediate threat to the minor’s health and safety (Welfare and
                       Institutions Code Section 300). Additionally, the officer is required to
                       attempt to contact the minor’s parent or guardian to determine if they are
                       able to assume temporary custody of the minor.
                 iv.   is in the hospital and release of the minor to a parent or guardian poses
                       an immediate danger to the child’s health and safety, or
                  v.   is a dependent of the court under court order when a peace officer has
                       reasonable cause to believe the minor has violated the order or left any
                       placement ordered by the court. (Welfare and Institutions Code Section
                       319)
          b. W&I Code 625
                   i.  comes within the jurisdiction of the court (Welfare and Institutions Code
                       Sections 601 or 602),
                  ii.  is a ward of the court who has violated a court order or escaped from a
                       court ordered commitment (Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 636 or
                       702), or
                 iii.  Is found in a public place suffering from any sickness or injury which
                       requires medical treatment.
  B. ​Recognize the options available to a peace officer for the disposition of a juvenile
      case
          a. When determining which disposition to make, the officer shall select the least
              restrictive alternative for the juvenile while providing for the safety of the
              community and the juvenile.
          b. Options to the peace officer include:
                   i.  releasing the minor,
                  ii.  releasing the minor to a parent or legal guardian,
                 iii.  delivering the minor to a public or private agency including school, youth
                       service or community center,
                 iv.   preparing a promise to appear (citation) and giving one copy to the minor
                       or responsible adult and the other copy to the probation officer, or
                  v.   delivering the minor to the juvenile probation department.
  C. Recognize the conditions under which a juvenile may become a dependent of the
      court (300 - victim)
      Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300(a) states: A peace officer may take a child
      into protective custody, if the child has suffered, or if there is a substantial risk that the
      child will suffer, nonaccidental serious physical harm from the child’s parent or guardian.
   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300(b)states: A peace officer may take a child into
   protective custody if the child has suffered, or is at substantial risk of suffering, serious
   physical harm or illness due to a parent or guardian’s inability to provide appropriate
   supervision, protection, food, clothing, shelter, medical treatment or protect the child from
   the conduct of another person.

   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300(c)states: A peace officer may take a child into
   protective custody if the child has suffered, or is at substantial risk of suffering, serious
   emotional damage due to the conduct of the parent or guardian, or due to the parent’s or
   guardian’s inability to provide appropriate care.

   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300(d)states: A peace officer may take a child into
   protective custody if the child has been sexually abused or there is a substantial risk he
   or she will be sexually abused by a parent, guardian, or other member of the household,
   or if the parent or guardian knew or reasonably should have known the child was being
   sexually abused or at risk of sexual abuse.

   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300(e) states: A peace officer may take a child
   under the age of five into protective custody if the child has suffered severe physical
   abuse by a parent, or person known to the parent, or the parent reasonably should have
   known that the child was being physically abused.

D. Recognize the situations in which a juvenile can be taken into temporary custody
   due to habitual​disobedience or truancy (601- status offender)
   A peace officer may take a juvenile into temporary custody under the authority of
   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.




E. Recognize the situations in which a juvenile can be taken into temporary custody
   for violating a law or ​ordinance (602 - ward)

   Any person under the age of 18 who violates any law (federal, state, city or county
   ordinance), is within the jurisdiction of the juvenile court and may be judged a ward of the
   court.
   NOTE: This does not apply to an ordinance establishing a curfew based solely on age.
   (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 601)
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


       Violating a law while under the age of 18 is covered by Welfare and Institutions Code
       Section 602(a).

       A peace officer may, without a warrant, take a minor into temporary custody for a
       misdemeanor, even though the crime was not committed in the officer’s presence.
       (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625)

       Minors under the age of 12 years old cannot be prosecuted in juvenile court,
       Unless they commit one or more of the following crimes:
       • Murder
       • Rape by force, violence, duress, menace or fear
       • Sodomy by force, violence, duress, menace or fear
       • Oral Copulation by force, violence, duress, menace or fear
       • Sexual penetration by force, violence, duress, menace or fear
       Because a minor under the age of 12 cannot be prosecuted, unless they commit one of
       the above crimes, it also means they:
       (1) Cannot be taken into custody under Welfare and Institutions Code 625, and
       (2) Cannot be cited with a notice to appear before a probation officer under Welfare and
       Institutions Code 626.


III. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must recognize that Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 206, 207, 207.1
 and 208 provide the ​basis for regulations established for the confinement of juveniles in
 adult detention facilities.

   A. Recognize the guidelines requiring the separation and segregation of dependent
      minors, status offenders, and wards within a facility

       Law enforcement facility means a police facility or sheriff’s station. It does not include a
       jail which has the purpose of detaining adults who are being held for criminal law
       violations.

       A jail is defined as a locked adult detention facility which holds both nonsentenced and
       convicted adult criminal offenders.

       A lockup is a locked room or secure enclosure under the control of a peace officer or
       custodial officer that is primarily for the temporary confinement of adults who have been
       arrested. Sentenced prisoners who are inmate workers may reside in the facility to carry
       out appropriate work.

       A court holding facility is a secure detention facility located within a court building and
       used for the confinement of a person solely for the purpose of a court appearance. The
       confinement does not exceed 12 hours.
   Juvenile facility means a juvenile hall, juvenile home, ranch or camp, regional youth
   education facility, boot camp, or special purpose juvenile hall.

   Juvenile hall means a county facility designed for the temporary care of minors detained
   in accordance with the provisions of the juvenile court law.

   Juveniles can be detained in a facility that also contains a lockup for adults no more than
   6 hours (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 207.1(b)), for the purposes of:
   • investigating the case,
   • facilitating the release of the minor to a parent or guardian, or
   • arranging for a transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility.
   NOTE: The 6-hour time period begins upon entering the law enforcement facility.

   Welfare and Institutions Code Section 206 requires that minors in each category be
   segregated from minors in other categories within a law enforcement facility:
   • solely on the grounds that they are dependent children or wards of the juvenile court
   (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300),
   • as status offenders (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 601), and
   • as wards (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602).

   Juveniles cannot be placed in an adult jail or lockup unless ordered to be housed there
   by a juvenile court judge. Even then, the minor must be segregated from all adult
   prisoners. (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 208)

   A juvenile being detained for being under the influence of alcohol or drugs may be
   escorted by a peace officer into an adult facility for the purpose of administering a test.
   At no time can the juvenile be:
   • out of the direct supervision of the officer while in the adult facility.
   • held in excess of two hours while in an adult facility.
   • permitted to come in contact with in-custody adults, or
   • locked in a cell or room within the adult facility. (Welfare and Institutions
   Code Section 23612).

B. Recognize the appropriate level of confinement for the purposes of temporary custody
   A minor is in secure detention whenever he or she is:
   • detained in a locked room or other secure enclosure,
   • secured to a cuffing rail or some other fixed object (bench, chair, table), or
   • reasonably restrained as necessary to prevent escape and protect the minor and
   others from harm

   A minor 14 years of age or older may be placed in secure detention only when
   a peace officer has a reasonable belief that the minor poses a serious security
   risk of harm to self or others.
   In making the determination whether the minor presents a serious security
   risk, the peace officer must take into account the following factors:
   • age, maturity, and delinquent history of the minor,
   • severity of the offense(s) for which the minor was taken into custody,
   • the minor’s behavior, including degree to which the minor appears cooperative or
   noncooperative,
   • the availability of staff to provide adequate supervision or protection of the minor, and
   • the age, type, and number of other individuals who are detained in the facility
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


       There is a need to provide closer supervision of a minor in secure detention
       than for an adult. A minor in secure detention usually poses an increased
       possibility of self-destructive behavior. Therefore, continuous around-theclock
       supervision of a minor is required.
       Supervision requirements include:
       • direct supervision by correctional staff, within hearing distance of a minor,
       and
       • documented, visual safety checks of a minor shall be at least every 30
       minutes.

    C. ​Recognize the requirements for preventing all contact between juveniles and adult
        prisoners ​within a facility
Communication is not allowed between a minor and an adult prisoner. In
situations in which a minor and an adult prisoner are in the same room or area,
there must be a facility staff person trained in the supervision of inmates in
constant side-by-side presence with either the minor or adult.
Situations in which a minor and an adult prisoner may be in the same room or
corridor are limited to the following:
• booking,
• medical screening,
• inmate worker presence while performing work necessary for the operation of the law
enforcement facility, such as meal service and janitorial service, and
• movement of people in custody within the law enforcement facility.

IV. ​LEARNING NEED

​Any person who commits an act or fails to perform a duty which then causes a juvenile
 to become a dependent or ​ward of the court, or to commit a crime, can be said to be
 guilty of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
     A. Recognize the crime elements of contributing to the delinquency of a minor
     B. ​Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
            a. PC 272
            b. Crime elements: committing any act, or omitting the performance of any duty,
                which causes or tends to cause or encourage a person under the age of 18 to
                come under the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 300, 601 or
                602.
            c. Misdemeanor
            d. Anyone (including another juvenile) can be charged with contributing to the
                delinquency of a minor if he or she causes or encourages a juvenile to come
                under any of the following subsections of Welfare and Institutions Code Sections
                300, 601, or 602.
LD 12 – Controlled Substances 12 hrs
I.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers need to know how drugs can affect normal behavior. This information assists the
 officer in ​determining which controlled substance is influencing a person’s conduct.

A.​Discuss the impact of drugs on the body

II.​LEARNING NEED

​To develop probable cause for possession of controlled substances, peace officers must
 be able to recognize what ​category of drug the person possesses.

A.​Recognize the category, common name(s), symptoms, physical properties and
packaging of the following ​controlled substances:

​1.​Stimulants

Common Names
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



Symptoms

Physical Properties and Packaging




​2.​Hallucinogens
 Common Names
Symptoms

Physical Properties and Packaging
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




​3.​Narcotic Analgesics

​4.​Cannabis
 Common Names
 • grass
 • weed
 • buds
 • pot
 • dope
 • purple
 • doobie
• ganja
• shake
• mota
• yerba
• kush
• sinsemilla
• Mary Jane
• “420”
• blunt
• reefer

Symptoms

Physical Properties and Packaging
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




​5.​Depressants
 ​6.​Inhalants
  ​7.​Dissociative Anesthetics (Phencyclidine)

B.​Recognize how the following substances are introduced into the body and general indicators
of use:

​1.​Stimulants

• paranoia
• increased alertness
• insomnia or restlessness
• body tremors (including eyelids)
• increased respiration
• loss of appetite
• rapid speech
• agitation
• dry mouth
• euphoria
• sweating
• grinding teeth
• residue or redness in nasal septum/under nose (if snorted)
• bloody or running nose (if snorted)
• blackened gums, (if smoked)
• burned fingers and lips (if smoked)
• a hacking cough (if smoked)

​2.​Hallucinogens
• hallucinations (intensified visual images and/or illusions)
• irrational, bizarre behavior and/or paranoia
• insomnia
• loss of appetite
• dazed appearance
• impaired memory
• body tremors
• excessive sweating
• increased respiration
• restlessness
• possible flashbacks (with LSD)
• grinding of teeth (bruxism)

​3.​Narcotic Analgesics

• bloodshot or reddening of the eyes
• eyelid and body tremors
• debris residue in mouth
• dry mouth
• loss of sense of time and space
• diminished inhibitions
• difficulty in concentrating or disorientation
• increased appetite
• odor of burnt marijuana
• green or yellow coating on tongue
Frequent users may have a chronic cough.

​4.​Cannabis
 ​5.​Depressants
  ​6.​Inhalants
   7.​Dissociative Anesthetics (Phencyclidine)

III.​LEARNING NEED

​Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of probable cause. Peace
 officers must know the ​elements required to arrest for violations of controlled
 substances statutes, and to categorize these crimes as ​infractions, misdemeanors, or
 felonies.
 A.​Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
 ​C.​Recognize the crime classification as an infraction, misdemeanor, or felony

​1.​Possession of drug paraphernalia
 Health and Safety Code Section 11364
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Crime Elements: Possessing a device for injecting or smoking a controlled substance other than
marijuana.
Misdemeanor

It is unlawful to possess an opium pipe or any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia
used for unlawfully injecting or smoking specific controlled substances.
NOTE: It is legal to possess paraphernalia until it is used or intent to use is shown. To show
specific intent to use, there must be the presence of evidence of prior use.


​2.​Being under the influence of a controlled substance
 Health and Safety Code Section 11550
 Crime Elements:
 • knowledge of its presence
 • control or willfully takes into his or her body a controlled substance
 • specific intent to inhale, inject, ingest, etc., a controlled substance
 Misdemeanor

under the influence = if the controlled substance is affecting the central nervous system, brain,
muscles, or other parts of that person’s body or if the substance is creating an abnormal mental
or physical condition.
use = it must be shown that, the suspect had recently used one
of the controlled substances.

Look at the signs and symptom that show they are under a controlled substance.

Penal Code Section 381
Crime Elements:
• any person who possesses or willfully ingests, inhales, or breathes fumes
• of any poison as defined in Schedule D of Section 4160 of the Business and Professions Code
• with intent to cause intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, stupefaction, intoxication, or
dulling of the sense
Misdemeanor

NOTE: Schedule D of Section 4160 of the Business and Professions Code applies to other
inhalants such as glue, cement, dope, paint thinner, and other hydrocarbons.
NOTE: Penal Code Section 381b has the same elements, but it refers to nitrous oxide.

Penal Code Section 647(f)
Crime Elements:
• any person
• found in any public place
• under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any drug, controlled substance, toluene, or any
combination thereof
• in such a condition that he or she is unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the
safety of others
• who interferes with or obstructs or prevents the free use of any street, sidewalk, or any other
public way
Misdemeanor

NOTE: A peace officer can lawfully release an individual from custody with no pending criminal
charges if the arrest was made for public intoxication only (Penal Code Section 849(b)(2)).


​3.​Possession of a controlled substance
 Crime Elements:
 • actual control or constructive possession
 • any amount (usable quantity)

NOTE: Usable quantity is a sufficient amount of the substance to be used as a controlled
substance.

Control or constructive control is when a person shows ownership of a
controlled substance or object. This is corroborated by:
• actual physical possession
• presence in house, vehicle, purse, etc., of subject who is owner, renter, or lessee
• evidence supporting constructive control (e.g., keys, clothing, utility bills, vehicle registration,
rental agreements, etc.)
• fingerprints


​4.​Possession of a controlled substance for sale
 Crime Elements:
 • actual control or constructive possession
 • specific intent, to sell
 • any amount available for sale

Specific intent to sell indicates a person plans to receive money or any other
consideration in exchange for a controlled substance. This is corroborated by:
• observation of subject’s movements, behavior, characteristics, associates, and high volume of
vehicle and pedestrian traffic at a specified location
• evidence such as packaging, scales, calculator, notebook, mathematical notations, cutting
agents, denominations and location of U.S. currency, etc.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• any amount available for sale




Personal note: to dumb down the difference between possession of a control substance for sale
vs. selling of a controlled substance
For sale= before the act took place
Selling of = after the act took place

​5.​Transporting/selling/furnishing, etc. of a controlled substance
 Crime Elements:
 • actual control or constructive possession
 • specific intent to transport, sell, furnish, or offer
 • any amount (i.e., usable quantity)

Intent to transport = a controlled substance specifically involves a vehicle,
motorized scooter, bicycle and any other similar forms of transportation, or
aircraft. Some factors worth noting might be:
• vehicle registration
• maps or notes bearing destination
• indicators of cash purchases, such as, common carrier tickets receipts (i.e.,
airline or bus)
• hidden compartments




Example: A man with a previous record of dealing drugs was seen passing out small paper tabs
outside a local high school. He told peace officers that he was not “selling” anything; it was free.
Analysis showed that the tabs contained LSD. The man has committed the crime of furnishing a
controlled substance, a felony. He may be arrested even though no money changed hands.

​6.​Manufacturing a controlled substance
 Health and Safety Code Section 11379.6(a)
 Crime Elements:
 • has knowledge of its presence
 • is engaged, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacturing, conversion, production,
 extraction, or preparation of a controlled substance
 Felony

Evidence of manufacturing or preparing a controlled substance by chemical synthesis may
come from:
• precursor chemicals used to make controlled substances
• solvents (e.g., butane, propane, rubbing alcohol, hexane, acetone etc.)
• laboratory equipment (i.e., chemicals, glassware, electrical devices, extraction tubes, turbo
molecular oven, etc.)
• receipts, literature, or formulas
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• associates
• prior arrests
• statements of admission/consciousness of guilt

Example: While responding to a disturbance at a residence, peace officers located in plain view
a case of butane, a large amount of marijuana, and an extraction device. The subjects admitted
to attempting to make butane honey oil (BHO) (Health and Safety Code 11379.6(d)).

​7. ​Possession of precursor chemicals for manufacturing
 Health and Safety Code Section 11383
 Crime Elements:
 • knowledge of their presence
 • possesses specified precursor chemicals
 • intent to manufacture controlled substances
 Felony

Precursor chemical = a substance from which another substance is formed.

Example: During a traffic stop a subject was found to be in possession of several boxes of
pseudoephedrine and a recipe for manufacturing methamphetamine. Again, ephedrine is the
key precursor to methamphetamine, and the recipe showed the subject’s knowledge of its
purpose and intent. The subject had committed the crime of possession of precursor chemicals
for manufacturing.

​B. ​Recognize the crime elements to arrest for:
 ​1.​Possession of marijuana/concentrated cannabis
  Health and Safety Code Section 11357
  Crime Elements:
  • Actual control or constructive possession
  • Age of the subject
  • Quantity and type (marijuana or concentrated cannabis)
  • Lack of physician’s recommendation
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 allows for adults 21 years of age or older to legally
possess up to 8 grams of concentrated cannabis and up to one ounce (28.5 grams) of
marijuana.
NOTE: Possession of more than one ounce (28.5 grams) and/or 8 grams of concentrated
cannabis on school grounds for any age is a violation of Health and Safety Code Section
11357(b)(1) or 11357(b)(2).

​2.​Smoking/ingesting marijuana/concentrated cannabis in public
 Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3.
 • in a public place or vehicle where smoking tobacco is prohibited
 • or within 1000 feet of a school, day care, or youth center while children are present
• or who smokes or possesses marijuana or an open container or package of marijuana or
marijuana products while driving, operating, or riding in the passenger seat or compartment of a
motor vehicle, boat, vessel, aircraft, or other vehicle used for transportation.

Every person who smokes or ingests marijuana or marijuana products in any public place,
except those locations in accordance with Business and Professions Code 26200, in the State
or California, has committed an infraction.

​3.​Cultivating or harvesting marijuana
 Health and Safety Code Section 11358.
 Crime Elements:
 • has knowledge of its presence
 • physically plants, cultivates, harvests, dries, or processes marijuana outside the provisions of
 the law

The lawful cultivation or harvesting of marijuana is covered by Health and Safety Code Section
11362 et al.




Crimes noted by “***” in this workbook are wobblers and punishable as
felonies pursuant to Penal Code Section 1170(h) if:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• the suspect has one or more prior convictions for an offense listed in Penal Code Section
667(e)(2)(C) includes sexually violent offenses, child molestation, homicide, or attempted
homicide, solicitation to commit murder, assault with a machine gun on a peace officer or
firefighter, possession of a weapon of mass destruction, and any serious or violent felony
punishable by life imprisonment or death.
• the suspect is required to register pursuant to Penal Code Section 290 or
• the suspect has two or more prior convictions of Health and Safety Code section 11358(c)
• other aggravating circumstances exist (NOTE: refer to Health and Safety Code Section
11358(d)(3).

​4.​Possession of marijuana/concentrated cannabis for sale




Crimes noted by “***” in this workbook are wobblers and punishable as felonies pursuant to
Penal Code Section 1170(h) if:
• the suspect has one or more prior convictions for an offense listed in Penal Code Section
667(e)(2)(C) includes sexually violent offenses, child molestation, homicide, or attempted
homicide, solicitation to commit murder, assault with a machine gun on a peace officer or
firefighter, possession of a weapon of mass destruction, and any serious or violent felony
punishable by life imprisonment or death.
• the suspect is required to register pursuant to Penal Code Section 290 or
• the suspect has two or more prior convictions of Health and Safety Code section 11358(c)
• other aggravating circumstances exist (NOTE: refer to Health and Safety Code Section
11358(d)(3).

​5.​Transporting/selling/furnishing, etc. of marijuana/concentrated cannabis




Crimes noted by “***” in this workbook are wobblers and punishable as felonies pursuant to
Penal Code Section 1170(h) if:
• the suspect has one or more prior convictions for an offense listed in Penal Code Section
667(e)(2)(C) includes sexually violent offenses, child molestation, homicide, or attempted
homicide, solicitation to commit murder, assault with a machine gun on a peace officer or
firefighter, possession of a weapon of mass destruction, and any serious or violent felony
punishable by life imprisonment or death.
• the suspect is required to register pursuant to Penal Code Section 290 or
• the suspect has two or more prior convictions of Health and Safety Code Section 11358(c)
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• other aggravating circumstances exist (NOTE: refer to Health and Safety Code Section
11358(d)(3).

 IV.​LEARNING NEED

 ​Peace officers need to recognize the existence of an illegal manufacturing and/or
  cultivating site for controlled ​substances based on observations, upon discovery, and
  take the appropriate actions. They need to know how to ​protect themselves and the
  public from the potential problems associated with a clandestine laboratory/illegal
  ​marijuana cultivation.
A.​Identify the characteristics of a clandestine laboratory/illegal marijuana cultivation

Clandestine Laboratory
Outdoor: Public lands, backyards, farms, any location the
plants can be grown and is least likely to be detected
(must have a water source).

Indoor: Foreclosed homes, rental properties, warehouses,
unethical businesses, mobile homes, motel rooms
(any location with access to a power source).

NOTE: No matter what type of marijuana cultivation there are potential dangers. Peace officers
need to be aware of the possibility of explosion, atmospheric contamination, exposure to
chemicals, booby traps, or armed subjects.


Illegal Marijuana Cultivation
Illegal indoor marijuana cultivation can be found in any structure. The
locations are usually determined so they will least likely be detected (e.g.,
residences, [vacant home, apartments, etc.], businesses, any location with
access to a power source).
Illegal outdoor marijuana cultivation can be found in any location. The
locations are usually determined so they will least likely be detected (e.g.,
open areas, state/national parks, residences [backyards]).


B.​Identify types of clandestine laboratories/illegal marijuana cultivation
C.​Identify the required safety precautions when securing a clandestine laboratory/illegal
marijuana ​cultivation
LD 15 – Laws of Arrest 7 hrs
  I.     Peace officers must recognize that temporary detention is an assertion of
        authority that is less than an arrest but more substantial than a consensual
        encounter.
    A. Differentiate between a detention and a consensual encounter
Detention:
A lawful detention requires reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.
A temporary detention or stop is an assertion of authority by a peace officer that would cause a
reasonable person to believe they are not free to leave. Such a belief may result from physical
restraint, unequivocal verbal commands, or other conduct by an officer.
 A detention of a person is limited in scope, intensity, and duration. It is less than an arrest and
more substantial than a consensual encounter.

Consensual Encounter:
A consensual encounter is a face-to-face contact with a person under circumstances that would
cause a reasonable person to believe they are free to leave or otherwise not cooperate.
No legal justification is needed as long as officers are in a place they have a right to be.

   B. Recognize appropriate peace officer actions during a detention


Detention

Common investigative actions include:
• questioning the person about identity and conduct
• contacting other individuals (e.g. witnesses) to confirm explanations,
verifying identification, or determining whether the person is wanted
(warrant check)
• checking premises, examining objects, or contacting neighbors or other
individuals to determine whether a crime (e.g., burglary) actually occurred
• bringing the victim to the suspect for identification purposes

Example: A peace officer detained a robbery suspect based on a broadcast description of the
person and the area of the robbery. The officer contacted the store clerk to identify the person.
The detention was legal even if the clerk says the person is not the one who robbed the store.

Consensual Encounter

Peace officers must be vigilant when contacting the public to ensure their
actions do not elevate a consensual encounter into a detention. Appropriate
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


actions peace officers can take during a consensual encounter are:
• requesting information (including identification and personal information)
• interviewing witnesses at the scene of a crime or accident
• conversing casually
• disseminating information


   C. Recognize conditions where the use of force or physical restraint is appropriate
      during a detention

If a person attempts to leave during a detention, officers may use reasonable
force and/or physical restraints to compel the person to remain. The use of
force does not necessarily elevate the detention to an arrest. Uncooperative
individuals may be:
• handcuffed, and/or
• placed in a patrol vehicle
Any use of force during a detention must be in accordance with Penal Code
Section 835a.


IV. Peace officers must know and comply with the statutory rules of arrest in order to
properly exercise their authority and responsibility while avoiding potential liability when
making arrests.




   A. Recognize when there is probable cause to arrest


   ● the 4th Amendment requires probable cause to make arrests and/or conduct
     searches
   ● searches or arrests without probable cause would infringe on a person’s
     privacy; meaning breaking the law
   ● probable cause is a higher standard of suspicion than reasonable suspicion
   ● factors that are used to establish reasonable suspicion may be used to
     establish probable cause
   ● Examples of factors for reasonable suspicion leading to probable cause to
     arrest:
Possible influence of alcohol or drugs → Illegal level of intoxication

Actions/words/demeanor during detention → self-incrimination, contraband

erratic driving behaviors → DUI contraband

pat searches for weapons → possession of illegal weapons or contraband

possible connection to burglary → discovery of stolen property


   B. Identify elements of a lawful arrest
   -   an arrest must be based on probable cause
   -   probable cause = a set of facts that would cause a person of ordinary care and
       prudence to entertain an honest and strong belief that the person to be
       arrested is guilty of a crime
   -   probable cause is based on the totality of the circumstances
   -   facts required to establish probable cause may include
           - direct investigation or reports
           - observational evidence
           - circumstantial evidence
           - second-hand statements from reliable sources
           - an officer’s expertise



 Elements of a Lawful Arrest                                             Penal Code
                                                                         Section

 An arrest may be made by a peace officer or private person.             834

 The arrested person must be taken into custody, in a case and           834
 in the manner authorized by law.

 An arrest may be made by actual restraint of the person, or by          835
 the person’s submission to the officer’s authority.

 Reasonable force may be used to make an arrest, prevent                 835a
 escape, or overcome resistance


   C. Differentiate between arrest and detention
   -   Arrest = taking a person into custody, in a case and in the manner authorized
       by law. Must be based on probable cause. Custody implies that the person
       making the arrest has full control.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



   -   Detention = Requires reasonable suspicion. Is an assertion of authority that
       would cause a reasonable person to believe they are not free to leave. Belief
       may come from physical restraint, unequivocal verbal commands, or other
       conduct by an officer. Detention is limited in scope, intensity, and duration.
Note extra info:
Reasonable suspicion may be based on observation, personal training and experience, or
information from eyewitnesses, victims, or other officers (totality of the circumstances).
Reasonable suspicion cannot be based on a hunch or instinct. If reasonable suspicion is not
properly established in a court of law, the case against the defendant may be dismissed or any
evidence seized may be excluded from trial.

Some factors that contribute to establishing reasonable suspicion are:
• appearance or condition of a person (intoxicated, resemblance to wanted person)
• actions (hiding objects, furtive movements, running from a crime scene)
• driving behaviors
• knowledge of the person’s “history” (criminal record or conduct)
• demeanor (non-responsive, nervous)
• time of day (unusualness)
• location of the stop (near crime scene, known criminal activity in area)
• officer training and experience (modus operandi, expertise in certain area such as narcotics or
gang activity)

Basically, reasonable suspicion: a crime has occurred, is occurring or is about to occur

V. ​When conducting a custodial interrogation, peace officers must follow Miranda
procedures to ensure that any answers obtained will be admissible in court.
    A. Identify the purpose of the Miranda warnings

The Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution states that:

No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.

 In Miranda vs. Arizona (1966), the United States Supreme Court ruled that unless certain
warnings are given to the suspect first, any statement made during custodial interrogation will
be viewed as “compelled” because of the inherently coercive atmosphere that exists and that
statement(s) would be inadmissible in a courtroom proceeding.

The Supreme Court set forth four advisements known as the Miranda warning, which a peace
officer must give to a person at the start of custodial interrogation.
Miranda warning Minimally, the following advisements must be provided to a person subjected
to custodial interrogations.
• You have the right to remain silent.
• Anything you say may be used against you in court.
 • You have the right to an attorney before and during questioning.
• If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be appointed for you free of charge, before
questioning, if you wish.
Purpose in simple terms, so the case will not be thrown out b/c suspect is made aware of rights.

   B. Recognize when Miranda warnings must be given

       -required before any custodial interrogation

       -custody and interrogation must both exist before the Miranda warning is
       necessary

       -custody = formal arrest objectively determined by the totality of circumstances

              -actually placed under arrest

              -subjected to the kinds of restraints associated with a formal arrest like
              handcuffs

       -interrogation = engages in direct/express questioning of a person about a
       crime and uses words or conduct reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating
       response from a person

       Custodial arrest: Arrest in which the suspect will be transported to a station,
       jail, detox center, juvenile hall, or school

       Searches incident to custodial arrest.. can we search vehicle like crack pipe
       example?
   C. Identify the proper administration of Miranda warnings

The person must understand all four advisements of the Miranda warning. To determine this, the
officer can ask the person about understanding after each advisement or ask one time after
each advisement has been given. Once a person has acknowledged their understanding of the
warning, they must go on to either waive (give up) their Miranda rights or invoke one or both of
them.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




   D. Recognize the impact of invoking:
      1. The right to remain silent
      2. The right to counsel


If an individual waives their rights, a valid waiver needs to be obtained for the answers to
questions to be admissible in court. A waiver can either be expressed or implied but must
always be knowing and voluntary.

Under Miranda, a person may invoke the right to remain silent or the right to counsel only at the
time of, or during, police custodial interrogation.


   E. Recognize the types of Miranda waivers

For any statement made after a waiver to be admissible in court, the waiver must be known and
voluntary.
    ● Expressed = yes/no
   ●   Implied = acknowledges understanding the advisements and exhibits conducted
       indicating waiver of rights
   ●   Conditional = acknowledges understanding the advertisements and is willing to go
       forward, but places a limitation/ qualification on answering questions

   F. Recognize the exceptions to the Miranda rule

A peace officer is not required to give a Miranda warning if there is an imminent concern for the
safety of a person or the public.


VI. To develop admissible evidence while ensuring the constitutional rights of all
individuals, peace officers must correctly follow standardized practices for conducting
crime scene interviews and interrogations.

   A. Differentiate between an interview and an interrogation

Interviews: The process of questioning non-suspects such as victims or witnesses (who
typically are willing to cooperate). Should take place at the crime scene.

Interrogation: The process of questioning suspects (who often may be unwilling to provide
information to investigating officers). • Questions or conduct reasonably likely to elicit an
incriminating response. More than likely takes place as part of a follow-up investigation.

   B. Identify the purpose of an interrogation

• obtaining an admission or confession
• identifying individuals involved in a crime
• establishing a person’s guilt
• corroborating the facts of a crime
• obtaining information that could lead to the recovery of evidence or property

   C. Differentiate between an admission and a confession
A peace officer who conducts an interrogation must have a clear understanding of the difference
between a confession and an admission.

A confession involves acknowledging the commission of all of the elements of a crime
An admission involves acknowledging certain facts that tend to incriminate the individual, but fall
short of a confession.

   D. Identify the conditions in which a confession or admission may be inadmissible in
      court
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


A confession is the most compelling evidence of a suspect’s guilt. However, a confession or
admission that violates the person’s constitutional protections and statutory requirements can be
ruled inadmissible as evidence and greatly jeopardize the state’s position.

The U.S. Supreme Court has upheld the inadmissibility of statements (i.e., confessions,
admissions) that were obtained in violation of the following four amendments to the U.S.
Constitution




NOTE: Maryland v. Shatzer was a case where the United States Supreme Court ruled that
peace officers could re- initiate questioning of a charged defendant who initially invoked their
Fifth Amendment rights only after the defendant has been released from custody for a period of
14 days or more since they last requested an attorney, so long as the defendant waives
Miranda.




LD 16 – Search and Seizure 8 hrs
  I.   Peace officers must have a clear understanding of their authority, responsibility,
       and potential for liability in the areas of search and seizure law, as well as the
       protections provided by constitutional law, statutory law, and case law against
       unreasonable searches and seizure.

   A. Constitutional protections guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment:
A priority of the authors of the United States Constitution and the California Constitution was to
avoid unlimited actions and intrusions by the government and to protect a person’s:
   ● privacy
   ● liberty
   ● possession of property

   B. Identify the concept of reasonable expectation of privacy can exist almost anytime
      and anyplace as long as:
   ● individuals have indicated that they personally (subjectively) expect privacy in the object
      or area
   ● their expectation is one which society is prepared to recognize as legitimate

   C. Recognize standing and how it applies to an expectation of privacy

Standing exists only if a subject has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the place or thing
that is searched or seized. Standing generally is established by ownership, lawful possession,
authority, and/or control of the area searched or the property seized. Only a person with
standing can challenge the search or seizure of property, based on Fourth Amendment
protections.
    ● ownership
    ● lawful possession
    ●     authority
    ● control of the area searched or the property seized

   D. Recognize probable cause to search and its link between Fourth Amendment
      protections and search and seizure law

Peace officers must demonstrate that probable cause exists to search a specific place for
specific property or contraband which will be used as evidence. Even though the court will
consider the totality of the circumstances, to meet the Fourth Amendment requirement, officers
must have specific facts which can be articulated in court or in a sworn statement (affidavit). To
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


establish probable cause to search, peace officers must be able to articulate how and why they
have a fair probability to believe:
  II.   a crime has occurred or is about to occur
 III.   evidence pertaining to the crime exists
 IV.    the evidence is at the location they wish to search

E. Recognize how the exclusionary rule applies to a peace officer’s collection of evidence

       If a court finds a search or seizure is not reasonable and a person’s Fourth Amendment
       rights have been violated by the government, all items seized during the search could be
       ruled inadmissible or excluded as evidence at trial.

NOTE: This inadmissible or excluded evidence is often referred to as
“The fruit of the poisonous tree.”

NOTE: The exclusionary rule does not appear anywhere in the
Constitution, but rather was created by the United States
Supreme Court to encourage proper law enforcement conduct.
Usually, the evidence is excluded as a penalty for the illegality of
the search or seizure.

 V.    To search for and seize evidence legally, peace officers must know the rules and
       requirements for obtaining and executing a search warrant.

            A. Recognize how probable cause serves as a basis for obtaining a search
                warrant
Before they can obtain a search warrant, peace officers must be able to provide a judge with
specific facts that meet the Fourth Amendment’s requirement of probable cause.

In the search warrant context, probable cause to search means enough credible information to
provide a fair probability that the object or person the peace officers seek will be found at the
place they want to search.
           B. Recognize the necessary conditions for securing an area pending the
              issuance of a search warrant

Under very limited circumstances peace officers may secure a residence while in the process of
obtaining a search warrant. In addition to probable cause to search, they also need exigencies,
that is, a belief, based on the surrounding circumstances or information at hand, that the
evidence will likely be destroyed or removed before a search warrant can be obtained.
    ● An area may be secured pending issuance of a search warrant if the suspect has been
         arrested inside the location.
    ● An area may be secured pending issuance of a search warrant if companions of the
         suspect may destroy items sought upon learning of the arrest.
NOTE: Refusal of consent to enter, by itself, does not provide justification to secure the
premises pending issuance of a search warrant


           C. Identify the time limitations for serving a search warrant

Penal Code Section 1534 states that the search warrant shall be executed and returned within
10 days from issuance.
The 10-day time limit means that peace officers have 10 days within which to execute the
warrant, beginning with the day after the warrant is issued and running until midnight of the 10th
day, with no exceptions for weekends or holidays.
        NOTE: It is a felony for a peace officer to willfully disclose the existence of a search
        warrant, prior to its execution, for the purpose of preventing the search or seizure. (Penal
        Code Section 168)


   ●   Failure to make a timely execution:
        If the 10-day period has expired, peace officers must either: obtain a new warrant
       resubmit the expired warrant so it may be reissued and revalidated

   ●   Failure to make a timely return:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


        The return of the warrant means returning the warrant and a written inventory of the
       property taken to the magistrate (PC 1537). The rule for return of the warrant is slightly
       different than for execution.
       If the 10th day falls on a weekend or holiday, then peace officers are entitled to postpone
       returning the warrant until the next business day.
       A late return will not normally invalidate the warrant or result in suppression, particularly
       if it happens unintentionally, unless the defendant can show prejudice.
   ● Time of service:
       Normally, a search warrant may be served only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
       10:00 p.m.
Note: As long as the search begins before 10:00 p.m., no nighttime authorization is necessary,
even though the search may continue on well beyond that hour.


           D. Recognize the elements for compliance with the knock and notice
              requirements when serving a search warrant

   ●   Before entering a private dwelling to execute a search warrant, officers must comply with
       the requirements of knock and notice as set forth in Penal Code Section 1531.
   ●    Knock and notice simply means that before entering a dwelling to serve a search
       warrant, officers must give notice to persons inside through certain actions.

       To complete the prescribed procedures for knock and notice, peace officers must:
   ●    knock or otherwise announce their presence
   ●    identify themselves as peace officers
   ●   state their purpose
   ●   demand entry
   ●   wait a reasonable amount of time
   ●   if necessary, forcibly enter the premises

           E. Recognize the application of the Nexus Rule while conducting an
              authorized search

       Under the nexus rule, officers may seize items not listed in the warrant when:
   ●   the items are discovered while the officers are conducting a lawful search for the listed
       evidence, and
   ●   they have probable cause to believe the item is contraband, evidence of criminal
       behavior, or would otherwise aid in the apprehension or conviction of the criminal
   ●   Nexus means a reasonable connection or link between two or more items.
E.g.: During a warrant search for narcotics, officers found a sawed-off shotgun in the trunk of the
suspect’s car. Although the weapon was not named in the search warrant, it was seized by the
officers as an illegal weapon.
While searching a suspect’s residence on a murder case, officers seized a pair of shoes with a
“waffle-like” pattern on the soles even though the shoes were not described in the search
warrant. The seizure of the shoes was legal because one of the officers had personal
knowledge that waffle-like shoeprints were left at the scene of the crime by the suspect.

VI.     When certain conditions are met, officers may lawfully search and seize evidence
        without a search warrant. For evidence to be admissible at trial, officers must have
        a clear understanding of the legal requirements for warrantless searches.
            A. Recognize why a plain view seizure does not constitute a search in a
               residence
Plain view: objects in the line of sight of an officer who has the right to be in that position are
subject to seizure without a warrant if the officer has lawful access to the objects
When an officer sees an item in plain view, no search has taken place. The owner or possessor
obviously has no reasonable expectation of privacy to items which are in plain view. Without an
expectation of privacy, the owner or possessor has no Fourth Amendment protection.

Simply because an officer can see an object in plain view from a lawful location does not
automatically mean the officer may legally enter private property without a warrant to seize it,
even if the object is obviously contraband or evidence of a crime. The officer also needs lawful
access.
Lawful access to private property is most commonly obtained when:
   ● the officer’s entry is based on consent
   ● the officer’s entry is based on exigent circumstances, for example, a reasonable belief
        that the evidence will be destroyed if entry is delayed in order to obtain a warrant
   ● the officer has lawfully entered the area for some other purpose (e.g., to conduct a
        parole or probation search, or an administrative or regulatory search, etc.)

Define exigencies circumstances


           B. Recognize the legal requirements for seizure of items in plain view

Peace officers must meet certain requirements before an item in plain view may be seized
legally and used as evidence.
 Peace officers must have:
    ● probable cause
    ● a lawful right to be in the location
    ● lawful access to the item
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Note: In a constitutional sense, when an officer sees an item in plain view, from a place the
officer has a lawful right to be, no search has taken place. The owner or possessor obviously
has no reasonable expectation of privacy for items which are in plain view. Without an
expectation of privacy, the owner or possessor has no Fourth Amendment protection.

Conditions and circumstances where warrantless searches and seizures are considered
reasonable and legal
The courts have identified certain specific conditions and circumstances where warrantless
searches and seizures are considered reasonable and, therefore, legal.

In addition to plain view seizures, these exceptions to the usual warrant requirement include:
cursory/frisk/pat down, consent searches, searches pursuant to exigent circumstances,
searches incident to custodial arrest, probation/parole searches

Recognize the scope and necessary conditions for the following types of warrantless
searches
   1. Cursory / frisk / pat searches (3-11)

Necessary Conditions:
Cursory/frisk/pat searches of detainees are allowed to prevent unexpected assault on peace
   officers. But a generalized, non-specific concern for officer safety is not sufficient reason to
   allow for the intrusion of a cursory/frisk/pat search. For a cursory/frisk/pat search to be
   lawful:
   ● the person must be lawfully detained for an investigative purpose
   ● the searching officers must be able to articulate specific facts which caused them to
       reasonably believe the person is dangerous or may be carrying a weapon baggy
       clothes??


Scope:
The scope of a cursory/frisk/pat search is limited to outer clothing for weapons or potential
weapons only.
Once the officer conducting the search realizes an object is not a weapon, the officer cannot
further manipulate the object; the officer must move on.
Any additional feeling, grabbing, or manipulating of the item is outside the scope of a
cursory/frisk search and will be considered an illegal search.


   2. Consent searches
Necessary Conditions:
For consent to be valid, the consent must be:
   ● voluntary, and
   ● obtained from a person with apparent authority or to give that consent
NOTE: If the consent is valid, the consenter has temporarily relinquished any
expectation of privacy for the area or item to be searched.
NOTE: An unlawful detention invalidates a consent search.

Scope of a consent search:
Peace officers may search those places and things they reasonably believe the
consenting person authorized them to search. As long as the search remains within
the scope given, officers may seize any crime-related evidence which they discover.

If the consenting person expressly or implicitly restricts the search to certain places
or things, officers must honor those restrictions. If the officers tell the consenting
person what type of evidence they are searching for, the scope of the search must be
limited to those places and things in which such evidence may reasonably be found.

Example: Consent to search inside a suitcase includes consent to look inside all the
   compartments of the suitcase.
Example: Consent to search the living room includes consent to look into small containers
   sitting on shelves and on tables within the room but not to enter any other rooms of the
   residence.
Example: Consent to search for documents within an office includes consent to look into file
   drawers as well as through a desk.

   3. Searches pursuant to exigent circumstances

Necessary Conditions:
Exigent circumstances means an emergency situation requiring swift action to
prevent:
   ● imminent danger to a person’s life or safety
   ● serious damage to property
   ● imminent escape of a suspect
   ● imminent destruction or removal of evidence

NOTE: Once inside, peace officers may do whatever is necessary to resolve the emergency --
  nothing more. Once the emergency has dissipated (no longer any imminent danger to life,
  property, etc.), a warrant may be needed for further searching.
NOTE: For additional information or exigent circumstance searches, refer to LD 9: Crimes
  Against Children.

Scope:
Under exigent circumstances, the primary purpose of the officer’s entry is to attend to the
   emergency situation. After entering the premises, officers may conduct a search only if it is
   reasonable to believe a search is necessary to secure the emergency.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Officers who are conducting a lawful search based on exigent circumstances may seize any
    item in plain view if there is probable cause to believe the item is contraband or evidence of
    a crime.

   4. Searches incident to arrest

Necessary Conditions:
A search incident to arrest may be conducted when:
   ● probable cause for a lawful arrest exists
   ● the suspect is taken into custody
   ● the search is contemporaneous with the arrest
NOTE: The search is justified by the custodial nature of the arrest, not by the nature or
   circumstances of the crime that lead to the arrest.

Scope:
A search incident to a custodial arrest may include:
   ● a full search of the arrestee’s person
   ● containers on the arrestee’s person
   ● the nearby physical area that was under the immediate control of the arrestee
       (sometimes referred to as “within arm’s reach”)

   5. Probation / parole searches

Necessary Conditions:
Warrantless, suspicionless probation and parole searches are both reasonable under the Fourth
   Amendment, according to the California Supreme Court.




Scope:
Parole search conditions permit a search of the parolee’s person, residence, and any other
   property under their control (e.g., vehicle, backpack, etc.).
Probation search conditions depend on the specific terms of the probationer, which may be as
   broad as parole conditions.
Therefore, officers should determine the probation search conditions before they conduct a
   search.



Recognize the scope and necessary conditions for conducting the following types of
   motor vehicle searches:


    1. Probable cause searches
Necessary Conditions:
Conditions required to justify a probable cause vehicle search are exactly the same
as those necessary to obtain a search warrant.
For a search of a vehicle to be legal under the probable cause exception:
    ● the vehicle must have been lawfully stopped, or otherwise be lawfully accessible
    ● the officers must have enough facts, knowledge, training, or experience to provide
       probable cause that the item they are seeking will be found inside the vehicle

Scope:
The scope of a vehicle search based on probable cause depends on the item
or object peace officers are searching for.
Officers may search any part of a motor vehicle, or anything inside the vehicle, as
as long as what they are searching for might reasonably be located there. This
includes, but is not limited to:
    ● the passenger
    ● compartment
    ● the glove compartment
    ● the hood
    ● the trunk
    ● any closed personal containers (including locked containers)

   2. Seizures of items in plain view

Peace officers must meet the same requirements for plain view seizures involving
vehicles as they would for seizing an item within plain view anywhere else. Peace
officers must:
     ● have probable cause to believe the item is crime-related
     ● lawfully be in a location to observe the item
     ● have lawful access to the item

   3. Protective searches
Necessary Conditions:
A protective vehicle search is permitted if:
   ● the driver or other occupant is being lawfully detained
   ● the officer reasonably believes, based on specific facts, that there may be a weapon
       (lawful or unlawful) or item that could be used as a weapon, inside the vehicle
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Officers need only a reasonable suspicion that a weapon or potential weapon is in
the vehicle. However, this suspicion must be based on specific facts or information.

Scope:
Like a cursory/frisk/pat search of a detained person, protective vehicle searches are
allowed to prevent an unexpected assault on peace officers.
Officers may search:
    ● only for weapons or potential weapons
    ● in the passenger compartment of the vehicle
    ● where the occupant(s) of the vehicle would have reasonable access to a weapon or item
         that could be used as a weapon
Once the searching officer determines there are no weapons or potential weapons
within the passenger compartment, the search must end.
NOTE: Officers should never assume there is only one weapon. If a weapon is discovered, the
    officer may seize it and continue to search for others even if there is no specific reason to
    believe there are additional weapons in the vehicle.

   4. Consent searches

Necessary Conditions:
The conditions for searching a vehicle based on consent are the same as any other
consent search.

Consent must be:
   ● voluntary, and
   ● obtained from a person with the authority (or apparent authority) to give that consent
      NOTE: Each officer is responsible for knowing their agency policy or consent searches.


Scope:
Peace officers may search only those areas of the vehicle they reasonably believe
the consenting person authorized them to search. If the consenting person expressly
or implicitly restricts certain areas of the vehicle or items within the vehicle, the
officers must honor those restrictions.


   5. Searches incident to custodial arrest

Necessary Conditions:
Officers may search the passenger compartment of a vehicle if they have made a valid custodial
arrest of any occupant of the vehicle and:
    ● the arrestee is unsecured (e.g. not locked in the police car, not handcuffed) and
   ●   has reachable access to the vehicle and/or
   ●   the officer has reasonable suspicion to believe evidence, pertaining to the crime for
       which the suspect was arrested, is to be found in the vehicle and/or
   ●   the officer has reasonable suspicion there is a weapon in the vehicle
       NOTE: The search may be conducted before the occupant is actually placed under
       arrest as long as probable cause to arrest existed at the time of the search.

Scope:
No matter what the arrest is for, as long as the driver or occupant of a vehicle is taken into
custody, peace officers may search:
“the passenger compartment of a vehicle incident to a recent occupant’s arrest only if it is
reasonable to believe that the arrestee might access the vehicle at the time of the search or that
the vehicle contains evidence of the offense of arrest”
Or
The arrestee is un-secure and still has access (arms reach) to the vehicle.

NOTE: The trunk of a vehicle may not be searched incident to the arrest of an occupant of the
vehicle.


   6. Instrumentality searches

Necessary Conditions:
A vehicle may generally be deemed an instrumentality of a crime if:
   ●   the crime was committed inside the vehicle
   ●   the vehicle was the means by which the crime was committed (e.g., hit and run)
NOTE: A vehicle is not an instrumentality merely because it is used during the commission of a
  crime.

Scope:
If the search is undertaken without a warrant, the scope will be determined by the nature of the
evidence being sought. That is, officers may search any part of the vehicle where the object(s)
they are looking for might reasonably be located.
If the search is undertaken pursuant to a warrant, the scope will be determined by the terms of
the warrant.

Recognize the scope and necessary conditions for conducting a vehicle inventory

Necessary Conditions:

To inventory a vehicle:

   ●   the vehicle must be in the lawful custody of law enforcement
   ●   the officer conducts the inventory pursuant to a standardized agency policy

Scope of search:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


The courts have made it clear that a standardized agency policy may be very broad
regarding vehicle inventories, permitting examination of any area where valuable or dangerous
items are commonly kept. This may include, but is not limited to:

   ●   under the seats
   ●   glove compartments
   ●   consoles
   ●   the trunk
   ●   closed containers


VII.    Peace officers must be aware of the due process rights that protect against
        impermissible suggestiveness when conducting any procedure involving a
        subject’s identification.
           A. Identify the importance of a peace officer’s neutral role during an
               identification procedure
Officers should not do anything that suggests or could be interpreted as suggesting which
suspect to select during any type of identification procedure.
           B. Identify officer actions before, during, and after an identification procedure
              to prevent impermissible law enforcement suggestiveness when
              conducting a:
                  1. Field show-up

Display the detainee outside the law enforcement vehicle without handcuffs or other forms of
restraint, if it is reasonable to do so.

                  2. Photographic spread
Use photographs that are all the same approximate overall size and depict the same
approximate shots of the person (e.g., all close-ups). Use photographs of persons of the same
sex, race, and similar facial characteristics.

                   3. Custodial Lineup

Choose participants of the same race, sex, and with similar characteristics, including distinctive
clothing or particular characteristics.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




LD 20 – Use of Force/Deescalation 6 hrs
  I.   ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must recognize that they have the authority to use objectively reasonable
 force to effect an arrest, to ​prevent escape, or to overcome resistance as authorized by
 the California Penal Code. For their safety, and for the ​safety and well-being of fellow
 officers, it is critical that peace officers know the laws governing the use of force.


Objectively reasonable force as stated by law

   -   The U.S. Constitution and the laws of the State of California allow peace officers to
       use objectively reasonable force to effect an arrest, to prevent escape, to overcome
       resistance, in self-defense, or in defense of others while acting in the lawful
       performance of their duties

4th Amendment and determining objective reasonableness as determined by the U.S.
   Supreme Court

   -   Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, (1989)
           - established that use of force, would be judged using the objective
               reasonableness standard
   -   the court determined that the use of force must be face specific, based on the totality
       of the circumstances confronting the officer at the time that the force was used
   -   the reasonableness of a particular use of force must be judged from the perspective of
       a reasonable officer
   -   factors used to determine objectively reasonable force:
           - whether the suspect posed an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or
               others
           - the severity of the crime
           - whether the suspect was actively resisting arrest
           - whether the suspect was attempting to evade arrest by flight
           - split-second judgements during circumstances that are tense, uncertain, and
               rapidly evolving
           - was there an opportunity to warn about the use of force
           - availability of other objectively reasonable force options
           - number of officers/subjects
           - age, size and relative strength of officers/subjects
          -   specialized knowledge, skills or abilities of subjects
          -   prior contact
          -   environmental factors
          -   when the officer has reason to believe that the subject is mentally ill,
              emotionally disturbed or under the influence of alcohol or drugs

Legal Framework Establishing a Peace Officer’s Authority during a legal arrest:

   1. a subject’s requirement to submit to arrest without resistance
          a. Penal Code Section 834a = “If a person has knowledge, or by the exercise of
             reasonable care, should have knowledge, that he is being arrested by a peace
             officer, it is the duty of such person to refrain from using force or any weapon to
             resist such arrest.”
          b. if you know you’re going to be arrested, required to refrain from using
             force/weapons
          c. but in People v. Curtis (1969) - California Supreme Court held that “a person
             may use reasonable force to defend life and limb against excessive force.”
   2. peace officer’s authority to use objectively reasonable force during a detention or
      arrest
          a. Penal Code Section 835 = “An arrest is made by an actual restraint of the
             person, or by submission to the custody of an officer. The person arrested may
             be subjected to such restraint as is reasonable for his arrest and detention.”
          b. may arrest and use reasonable force necessary for the detention or arrest

Circumstances set forth in the CA Penal Code when an officer has authority to use
force

   -   Penal Code Section 835a(b)
   -   Penal Code Section 835a(d)

Agency Policies and reasonable force

   -   agencies are free to establish policies and procedures regarding the use of force by
       their employees that are more restrictive than those established in the Constitutional,
       Statutory and Case Law


II. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must understand how the principles of deescalation can enhance contacts
 with the public and may result in improved decision-making, reduction in situational
 intensity, and tank assopportunities for outcomes with greater voluntary compliance.

Define Deescalation
   - the process of using strategies and techniques intended to decrease the intensity of the
       situation
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



Common misconceptions of Deescalation
  - if an officer uses force, they failed to de-escalate
  - de-escalation is a soft form of policing
  - officers are losing control at the scenes
  - officers are being required to walk away or retreat
  - officers are letting their guard down
  - de-escalation is too difficult to apply in rapidly changing situations

Benefits of Deescalation
   - positive impact on public trust
   - reduced danger to officer and public
   - improved community cooperation
   - positive impact on officer wellness

History of Deescalation
   - Senate Bill 230 (2019-2020)
   - the intent of the bill was to establish the minimum standard for policies and reporting
       procedures regarding California law enforcement agencies’ use of force
   - publish use of force policy which provides law enforcement agencies with guidance
       regarding the use and application of force to ensure such applications are used only to
       effect arrests or lawful detentions, overcome resistance or bring a situation to legitimate
       control
   - agencies may use policies and training as evidence in proceedings involving an officer’s
       use of force
   - policies and trainings will be considered as a factor in the totality of circumstances
   - every instance will be reviewed by the department on a case by case basis to evaluate
       all facts and to determine if the incident is within the policy and in accordance with
       training

4 Core Concepts of Deescalation
   1. Self-control
          a. understanding of physical and psychological reactions of the public and law
              enforcement officers may assist in maintaining self control
   2. Effective communication
          a. clear commands and questions, good observations, listening skills, appropriate
              terminology
   3. Scene assessment and management
         a. an accurate picture of what is occurring and assists in the management of force
             options
   4. Force Options
         a. reasonable use of force techniques may reduce situational intensity

Critical Decision-making Model
    1. Collection information
           a. information gathered prior to arriving at the scene
           b. use of distance
           c. use of additional officers
           d. communication and verbalization utilized
           e. level of success/failure of each technique
    2. Assess situation, threats, and risks
           a. situation
                   i.  determine if the situation poses a threat or risk
                  ii.  requires an immediate response
                 iii.  if there is an immediate threat
           b. threats
                   i.  awareness of the situation
                  ii.  assessing and requesting resources
                 iii.  cover and concealment
                 iv.   distance between officer and subject
           c. risk
                   i.  subject’s behavior/condition
                  ii.  possible communication issues (i.e. language barrier)
                 iii.  subject’s access to weapons
                 iv.   subject’s special skills/knowledge (i.e. like a trained boxer)
    3. Law and policy
           a. Is there a legal reason/obligation to act?
           b. What legal powers does the officer have based on federal, state and local
               ordinances?
           c. if the officer’s actions within agency policy?
    4. Plan
           a. identify roles/responsibilities
           b. contingencies
           c. options/resources
           d. utilization of time
    5. Act, review, and reassess
           a. implement a plan and prepare to adjust
           b. review what lessons can be learned following the conclusion of the contact

Recognize how tactical methods that use time, distance, cover, and concealment assist
in de escalation
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


   -   allow more time to pass, to “slow things down” and aid in reducing the intensity of the
       situation
   -   creating distance may calm an irate individual down but also poses a loss of situational
       control and jeopardizes safety
   -   situational awareness is critical to identify immediate threats and understand how
       individuals alter their behavior
   -   tactical repositioning is utilized for officer safety; an officer being less, or more, visible
       can affect the actions of others

Recognize how strategic communication may enhance deescalation
   I. strategic communication = the use of verbal and non-verbal techniques to aid in
      controlling a situation and enhancing officer and community safety
  II. benefits of strategic communication
          A. de-escalation
          B. maintaining officer and community safety
          C. gaining voluntary compliance
          D. building rapport
          E. decreasing citizen complaints
 III. how to handle verbal abuse: deflection and redirection
          A. “appreciate that, but…”
          B. “I understand that, but…”
          C. “I got that, however…”
          D. “Maybe so, but…”
          E. “I hear that, however…”
 IV.  LEAP = Listen, Empathize, Ask, Paraphrase, Summarize

III. Peace officers must recognize that they have a range of force options available to
them. However, in all cases the use of force must be objectively reasonable compared to
the threat, resistance, and other circumstances known to the officer at the time the force
was used.
            A. Define the term “Force Option”

Force options are choices available to a peace officer in any given situation to overcome
resistance, to effect an arrest, to prevent escape, in the defense of self and others, and to gain
control of the situation.

           B. Identify that the objective of using force is to overcome resistance to gain
              control of an individual and the situation
The objective for the use of force by peace officers is to gain and maintain control of an
individual and the situation. Peace officers are required to:
 • use the type of force which is objectively reasonable under the totality of the circumstances
• use only the amount of force objectively reasonable to overcome resistance and to gain
or maintain control of a subject
 • conform to agency policy, federal and state law

           C. Recognize force options and the amount of force peace officers may use
              based on the subject’s resistance

The subject’s actions and the practical considerations involved in a situation are major factors in
determining the type of force the officer may lawfully use in order to gain or maintain control of
the subject or the situation.

Reference table below for resistance/action vs officer’s options of force

Note: It is important for peace officers to recognize the advantages and disadvantages of the
various force options. Some of the factors to consider are: Distance, number of subjects,
subject’s mental state or state of intoxication, subject’s physical strength and skill, affecting or
endangering other people, time.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
           D. Explain the importance of training and ongoing practice when responding
              to potentially dangerous situations that may require the use of force

Through continual training, officers can learn to discipline the mind to remain calm, flexible, and
alert at all times.


 Trained Responses                                 Untrained Responses

 • are less predictable to the subject than        • are more predictable to the subject.
 instinctual reaction.                             • are limited.
 • are correctable.                                • may be improper.
  • are flexible (can be adjusted and              • may be dangerous to the officer, the subject,
 customized).                                      or others.
 • can lead to increased self-control.
 • can promote trustworthiness.
 • will reduce lag time.


Training and practice in both physical and emotional skills provide the understanding and
manipulative ability needed by a peace officer in the use of force in potentially dangerous
situations.
The following chart highlights what an officer gains from training and what may happen without
it:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



 Training and practice can help attain...          Lack of training and inadequate practice
                                                   may result in...

 confidence in an officer’s abilities.             lack of confidence.

 Officers gain essential confidence in             Lack of confidence can seriously affect
 themselves to respond appropriately and           officers’ ability to control their own physical
 apply the use of force effectively to gain        and emotional instinctive reactions which can
 control of subjects and situations.               diminish public trust.

 correct responses.                                incorrect reactions.

 The ability to make split-second decisions        Not being able to respond correctly may
 may mean the difference between life and          cause an officer to overreact or under react.
 death. Officers must be prepared at all times     This can cost the officer’s life or the lives of
 to respond quickly and effectively to any         innocent people.
 potential threat.



 Training and practice can help attain...          Lack of training and inadequate practice
                                                   may result in...

 mental alertness and concentration.               panic.

 By staying alert and able to concentrate          Panic is the total and absolute loss of control.
 under all types of conditions, officers will be   Panic in crisis situations will render an officer
 able to keep their minds on the situation and     incapable of applying the correct and
 maintain awareness.                               necessary defensive action for the situation.

 control over body and emotions.                   loss of control over body and emotions.

 Control of emotions will enhance an officer’s     When officers lose control of themselves,
 mental as well as physical ability to act         they may lose control of the situation.
 properly. Physical control will increase an
 officer’s self-confidence and help further
 develop emotional control.


NOTE: Without proper, adequate, and continual training, physical skills deteriorate.

           E. Discuss the importance of effective communication when using force
Effective communication may enable a peace officer to gain cooperation and voluntary
compliance in stressful situations (e.g. confronting a hostile subject). This is an important factor
in gaining the respect and trust of the communities you serve.

The importance: The vast majority of law enforcement responsibilities involve effective
communication. Communication involves both command presence and words resulting in
improved safety. The following chart highlights some benefits of effective communication:



 For…                                                 Effective Communication…

 Safety                                               • provides skills that reduce the likelihood of
                                                      physical confrontation
                                                      • can result in a reduction of injuries

 Professionalism                                      • renders more effective public service and
                                                      improves community relations
                                                      • decreases public complaints and internal
 Cont. Professionalism                                affairs investigations
                                                      • decreases civil liability
                                                      • lessens personal and professional stress




 When peace officers communicate, they represent:
• themselves/agency
• executive staff (i.e. chief or sheriff)
 • government (city, county, state, federal)
• public interest
• authority (laws, the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, etc.)
• law enforcement profession as a whole

Effective communication is a basic element of the use of force.
And A major goal of law enforcement is to gain voluntary compliance without resorting to
physical force.
The use of deescalation communication can aid in diffusing a potentially volatile incident and
avoid the need to use force against an individual.




IV. Peace officers must fully comprehend their authority, responsibility, and liability
regarding the use of deadly force as authorized by law
           F. Identify the legal standard for the use of deadly force
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


The decision to use deadly force to defend against an imminent threat of death or serious bodily
injury to the officer or to another person is guided by federal case law and California state law.


Any peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe the person to be arrested has
committed a public offense may use objectively reasonable force to effect arrest, to
prevent escape, or to overcome resistance. - Penal Code Section 835a(b)

A peace officer is justified in using deadly force upon another person only when the
officer reasonably believes, based on the totality of the circumstances, that such force
is necessary. - Penal Code Section 835a(c)

           G. Identify the factors required to establish sufficiency of fear for the use of
              deadly force

According to Penal Code Section 835a, fear alone does not justify the use of deadly force. An
imminent harm is not merely a fear of future harm, no matter how great the fear and no matter
how great the likelihood of the harm, but is one that from appearances, must be instantly
confronted and addressed.
 The courts have held that:

• A simple statement of fear for your safety is not enough; there must be objective factors to
justify your concern
• It must be objectively reasonable
• It must be based on the facts and circumstances known to the officer at the time

           H. Recognize facts an officer should consider when determining whether or
               not to use deadly force
A peace officer shall not use deadly force against a person based on the danger that person
poses to themselves, if an objectively reasonable officer would believe the person does not
pose an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury to the peace officer or to another
person.
The decision of whether or not to use deadly force may be influenced by, but not
limited to, the officer’s:

          ●    training and experience
          ●    judgment
          ●    mental alertness
          ●    existing facts and circumstances
          ●    understanding of state law, case law, and agency policy

          I.   Discuss the role of agency policies regarding the use of deadly force
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



Although the law and courts have established a baseline for the use of deadly force, the
conditions under which deadly force may be used are strictly controlled by agency policy.
Officers must conform to agency policy and federal and state law.
Penal Code Section 7286(b) provides minimum guidelines that agencies are required to include
in their use of force policies.
Some issues regarding the use of deadly force addressed by agency policies include, but are
not limited to:
 • defense of self and others against serious bodily harm or death
• use of warning shots
 • shooting at or from a moving vehicle
 • shooting from air asset platform
• intentional strikes to the head or neck with an impact weapon

          J. Recognize the law regarding justifiable homicide by a peace officer and the
             circumstances under which the homicide is considered justifiable


There are conditions that must be met in order for a homicide by peace officer to be
deemed justifiable, and therefore lawful. The following chart further identifies these
conditions.
V.   When a force option has been employed, peace officers’ reports must include the
     critical information to ensure that the chronology, specifics of the events, and the
     people involved are properly documented.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


            A. Describe why complete documentation of the use of force is critical to the
                 peace officer and the peace officer’s agency, to include:
                     1. Justification for using force
Officers need to describe the factors between the subject and themselves that justify the use of
force, including but not limited to:
• number of officers/subjects
• height and weight of each subject
• gender and age of each subject
• strength and fighting skills of each subject
• physical condition of each subject
• clothing (e.g., uniform with equipment vs. casual attire)
• stance of each subject (describe)

In addition to the subject’s physical attributes, it is necessary to document the specific
characteristics regarding the identification of a subject. Some characteristics include, but are not
limited to:
• prior contact
• obvious prison or gang tattoos
• specific gang attire
• access to potential weapons such as knives, boots, rings, or guns

                    2. Relevant factors and detail
Officers should observe and record details regarding the environment where the confrontation
took place. This information includes, but is not limited to:
 • physical environment where the contact took place (e.g. high crime area, etc.)
• subject’s potential to gain assistance or aid from friends or associates

                   3. Deescalation strategies and techniques utilized
Deescalation techniques that are attempted or actually utilized should be documented in the
appropriate reports related to an incident.
Deescalation techniques that can be documented include, but are not limited to:
• Information gathered prior to arriving at the scene
• Use of distance
• Use of additional officers
• Communication and verbalization techniques utilized
• The level of success or failure of each deescalation technique
            B. Supervisor responsibilities
                   1. Use of force review and analysis
Peace officers should have a basic understanding of their agency supervisor responsibilities and
make proper notifications in accordance with their agency policy

                  2. State required reporting
Peace officers should follow State law and their agency policy related to the documentation of
use of force.



VI. Peace officers must be ready to, and capable of, safely taking control of a dangerous
situation.

            C. Discuss factors that can affect a peace officer’s response when threatened
                 with danger, to include:
                    1. Fear
                           a) Reasonable Fear : A controlled and legitimate fear and a
                               mechanism that is necessary for officer safety based on perceived
                               circumstances
The officer may experience reasonable fear as a result of:
 • a sudden or erratic movement by a subject
• the sight of a weapon in a subject’s possession
• the knowledge that a person is in danger of bodily harm
• a sudden sound produced outside of the officer’s field of vision
 • unresponsive, unexpected response to the officer’s action

                         b) Unreasonable fear: Generated in the officer’s mind with no direct
                              correlation to facts and situations
Unreasonable fear includes overreactions to true potential threats as well as reactions to unreal
threats based on prejudice or poor application of past experience.

The officer may experience unreasonable fear as a result of:
• an emotional response to a traumatic event
• generalization of past trauma (such as being bitten by a dog as a child or suffering a painful
gunshot wound)
• personal prejudice, explicit/implicit bias, against people of a particular race, religion, ethnic
group, etc.
• overall anxiety as a result of uncertainty about one’s own skills and expertise

                   2. Anger → when anger is out of control it becomes a liability
                           a) universal = being attacked or shot at
                           b) personal = individual sensitivities that may prompt a
                              reaction, emotional bruises and other sources of personal
                              vulnerability

                   3. Indecision and hesitation.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


           D. Give examples of acceptable techniques for managing anger

Few people can exercise effective emotional control when they are extremely angry. To avoid
getting to this point, peace officers need to prepare themselves for dealing with anger. Some of
these methods are listed in the following chart.




              E. Describe the benefits of ongoing physical and mental training for peace
                 officers involving the use of force
Through continual training, officers can learn to discipline the mind to remain calm, flexible, and
alert at all times.
 Trained Responses                                 Untrained Responses

 • are less predictable to the subject than        • are more predictable to the subject.
 instinctual reaction.                             • are limited.
 • are correctable.                                • may be improper.
 • are flexible (can be adjusted and               • may be dangerous to the officer, the subject,
 customized).                                      or others.
 • can lead to increased self-control.
 • can promote trustworthiness.
 • will reduce lag time.


Training and practice in both physical and emotional skills provide the understanding and
manipulative ability needed by a peace officer in the use of force in potentially dangerous
situations.

What are control holds?
The following chart highlights what an officer gains from training and what may happen without
it:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



VII. Peace officers must recognize the consequences of using unreasonable force, and
their legal and ethical responsibilities to intercede if the force being used by another
peace officer is inappropriate or unlawful.
            F. Explain the legal and administrative consequences associated with the use
               of unreasonable force

An officer who uses more force than is objectively reasonable faces the possibility of criminal
prosecution, civil liability, and/or agency administrative sanctions.
G. Explain an agency’s potential liability associated with the use of
   unreasonable force
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



The unreasonable use of force by an officer can discredit and result in loss of public support to
an officer’s agency and the law enforcement profession as a whole.

State and federal law holds an agency responsible for the conduct of its officers while acting
within the scope of their authority. The agency can be:
 • liable under Federal civil rights and state laws
• sued for negligent or inadequate training or failure to supervise adequately

             H. Explain the consequences of an officer’s failure to intercede when
                 unreasonable force is used by another peace officer
Officers could suffer one or more of the following if they do not intervene:
• increased stress
• embarrassment
• civil/criminal action
• disciplinary action
• loss of career
• loss of public trust and respect
• loss of trust and respect from fellow officers


           I.   Discuss immediate and delayed intervention technique
                   1. Immediate
During a high-stress situation such as making an arrest, peace officers may experience
emotional reactions towards the subject. As a result, they may use unreasonable force without
realizing what they are doing. At this point it is imperative that a fellow officer intervene
immediately to diffuse the situation.
 There are three common immediate intervention techniques listed in the following chart:
                    2. Delayed
In situations that have already taken place, it may be necessary to implement a delayed
intervention technique. This can be valuable in improving the professional quality of future
contacts.
 There are three common delayed intervention techniques, listed in the following chart. In each
of the provided solutions, the fellow officer should additionally include the tenets of Principled
Policing:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




           J. Discuss factors that may inhibit a peace officer from intervening in a
              situation where a fellow officer may be applying unreasonable force

Peace officers may fail to act when a fellow officer is behaving inappropriately because of
several factors. The following chart lists both the personal and psychological factors that may
prevent intervention; however, these are not the only factors
LD 25 – Domestic Violence 10 hrs
  I.   LEARNING NEED

To effectively carry out their responsibilities, peace officers need a basic knowledge of
legal definitions, terminology and applicable Penal Code Sections as well as an
understanding of how to classify the crimes that may lead to arrests.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Recall the definition of domestic violence (Penal Code Section 13700)

Domestic violence means abuse committed against an adult or a minor (Penal
Code Section 13700(b)). This include(s) one or more of the following relationships:
• spouse/former spouse
• cohabitant/former cohabitant
• dating relationship/former dating relationship
• engagement relationship/ former engagement relationship
• person with whom the respondent has had a child
NOTE: There is no time limit on how long ago the relationship existed.

Abuse means intentionally or recklessly causing or attempting to cause bodily injury, or placing
another person in reasonable apprehension of imminent serious bodily injury to himself, herself,
or another. (Penal Code Section 13700(a))

Cohabitants means two unrelated adults living together for a substantial period of time, resulting
in some permanency of relationship (Penal Code Section 13700(b)). In the context of domestic
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


violence, parties who are simply co-tenants, not involved in intimate relationships, are not
considered cohabitants.

Factors that may be considered when determining whether individuals are cohabitating include,
but are not limited to:
• sexual relations between the parties while sharing the same living quarters
• sharing income or expenses
• joint use or ownership of property
• whether the parties hold themselves out as spouses
• the continuity of the relationship
• the length of the relationship


   B. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest a suspect for the following
      crimes as applied to domestic violence incidents:
   C. Recognize the crime classification for each crime that may result from a domestic
      violence incident as a misdemeanor or felony
          1. Willful infliction of corporal injury
                 a. PC 273.5
                 b. Crime Elements:
                         i.   the person willfully inflicts corporal injury upon another person
                        ii.   the other person is a spouse, former spouse, cohabitant, former
                              cohabitant, current or former dating relationship partner, current or
                              former engagement partner, or they have a child in common.
                       iii.   The injury is considered a traumatic condition upon the victim
                 c. Felony
                 d. Corporal injury = is injury to a person’s body.
                 e. Traumatic condition = means a condition of the body, such as a wound or
                     external or internal injury including, but not limited to, injury as a result of
                     strangulation or suffocation, whether of a minor or serious nature, caused
                     by a physical force. For purposes of this section, “strangulation” and
                     “suffocation” include impeding the normal breathing or circulation of the
                     blood of a person by applying pressure on the throat or neck.
                 f. Spouse = is a relationship defined as being an individual partner in
                     marriage.
                 g. Example: A woman kicked her live-in boyfriend in the ribs; he was
                     writhing on the floor when the peace officer arrived. This is willful infliction
                     of corporal injury.
      h. Example: A man slapped his wife, causing bruises, and yelled at her to
          clean up the house. This is willful infliction of corporal injury.
      i. Example: A husband placed both hands around his wife’s throat and
          began to apply pressure during an argument. While applying pressure to
          the wife’s throat, the wife began to experience vision changes and
          became light-headed. This is willful infliction of corporal injury.
2. Battery
      a. PC 243(e)(1)
      b. Crime Elements: force or violence against a:
              i.  spouse/former spouse
             ii.  current dating relationship/former dating relationship
            iii.  current engagement relationship/former engagement relationship
            iv.   person with whom respondent has had a child
             v.   cohabitant (do they need to have had intimacy? Bc cohabitant
                  means also to share bills essentially a roommate)
      c. NOTE: Peace officers should be aware that battery can be committed
          against any person. However, it is only considered to be domestic
          violence when it occurs in the relationships mentioned above.
      d. NOTE: Former cohabitant is not included in Penal Code Section
          243(e)(1). Peace officers need to determine if a former cohabitant had a
          dating or engagement relationship in order to arrest for Penal Code
          Section 243(e)(1).
      e. NOTE: Dating relationship means frequent, intimate associations primarily
          characterized by the expectation of affectional or sexual involvement
          independent of financial considerations. (Penal Code Section 243(f)(10))
      f. Misdemeanor
      g. The peace officer may arrest the batterer without a warrant - even when
          the act is not committed in his or her presence - when both of the
          following circumstances apply:
              i.  There is reasonable cause to believe that the batterer has
                  committed an assault or battery, whether or not it has been
                  committed.
             ii.  The arrest is made as soon as probable cause arises to believe
                  that the batterer has committed the assault or battery, whether or
                  not it has been committed.
      h. Example: A man came home and found his wife on the phone. He told her
          to hang up. When she didn’t hang up immediately, he got mad and
          grabbed her arm but did not leave a mark. The husband admitted
          grabbing her because he wanted to use the phone.
      i. Example: A man who was living with his intimate partner hit him with an
          open hand.
3. Stalking
      a. PC 646.9
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


              b. Crime Elements: willfully, maliciously and repeatedly follows another
                 person, or willfully, and maliciously harasses another person, makes a
                 credible threat, with intent to place the person in reasonable fear for his or
                 her safety or the safety of his or her immediate family
              c. Felony
              d. Example: A woman received another letter from her ex-husband
                 threatening to follow her home from work and give her “what is coming to
                 her.”
              e. Example: A woman answered the door to find her husband drunk,
                 cursing, and threatening to abduct their children. This is the second time
                 he has come over this week in violation of a valid Domestic Violence
                 Restraining Order.
       4. Malicious destruction of telephone, telegraph, cable television, or electrical
          lines
              a. PC 591 - For landlines
                     i.  Crime Elements: the obstruction, removal, taking down, severing,
                         or making an unauthorized connection, of phone, cable, electric
                         lines, or their wires, that conduct electricity
                    ii.  NOTE: Before peace officers can make an arrest, they need to
                         establish if the instrument and/or lines were operational.
                   iii.  NOTE: Cellular telephones do not fall within this section.
                   iv.   Wobbler
              b. PC 591.5 - For wireless devices/ cell phones
                     i.  Crime Elements: removes, injures, destroys, damages or
                         obstructs, any wireless communication device with the intent, to
                         prevent the use of the device to summon assistance or notify law
                         enforcement
                    ii.  Misdemeanor
       5. Preventing or dissuading a witness or a victim from testifying
              a. PC 136.1
              b. Crime Elements: knowingly and maliciously preventing or dissuading, or
                 attempting to prevent or dissuade, a witness or victim from (one or more
                 of the following):
                     i.  attending or giving testimony at a trial or other inquiry authorized
                         by law
                    ii.  reporting a crime to a law enforcement, parole, probation, or
                         correctional officer, judge, or prosecutor
                   iii.  causing a complaint or other charging document to be sought,
                         issued, or assisting in the prosecution
                     iv.    arresting or seeking the arrest of a subject
                c. Misdemeanor/ Felony
          6. Criminal threats
                a. PC 422
                b. Crime Elements: a threat to commit a crime resulting in death or great
                   bodily injury to a person or his or her immediate family. The threat must
                   be such as to cause a person reasonably to be in sustained fear for his or
                   her own safety or for his or her immediate family’s safety.
                c. NOTE: The threat can be made to the victim or to a third party.
                d. NOTE: The threat can be made verbally, in writing, or by means of
                   electronic communication devices such as computers, cell- phones,
                   facsimile machines, and pagers, and can be explicit or implicit.
                e. Felony
          7. Spousal rape
                a. PC 261
                b. Crime Elements: an act of penile/vaginal intercourse, which is against the
                   will of the spouse (i.e.; without consent) and is accomplished through
                   force, fear, menace, incapacitation, or threats
                c. Felony
                d. 2 males would be considered sodomy

II. LEARNING NEED

Domestic violence causes tremendous harm to victims and society as a whole. Each
member in an abusive or violent household suffers physically and/or emotionally, and
often violence is spread from one generation to the next. Current law affords peace
officers greater opportunity to assist victims, and provides protection and education to
help stop the cycle of violence.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Identify common characteristics of a victim and a batterer
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




  B. Identify a peace officer’s role in reducing domestic violence

     Early consistent response along with proper documentation can have a positive impact
     on the peace officers involved by:
     • increasing the chance of successful prosecution
     • decreasing possible repeat calls
     • providing potential resolution and closure which decreases peace officer frustration and
     stress
III. LEARNING NEED
When peace officers respond to a domestic violence call, it is essential that they proceed
cautiously to ensure the protection of all people involved.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
   A. Recognize the initial process for responding to a domestic violence call to include:
         a. Making contact with members of the LGBTQ community
   B. Recognize under what circumstances an arrest should be made
   C. Identify physical evidence to be collected
   D. Recognize procedures for seizing firearms or other deadly weapons
   E. Discuss resources available for victim protection

IV. LEARNING NEED
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


When there is a court order involving domestic violence, it must be verified and enforced
following specific procedures.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  A. Identify the differences between the types of court orders to include:
        1. Criminal protective/stay-away orders
        2. Emergency Protective Orders
        3. Restraining orders




       B. Identify the validity of a restraining order
       C. Identify the purpose for obtaining an Emergency Protective Order

An Emergency Protective Order (EPO) is an order issued by a judicial officer upon request by a
peace officer under Family Code Section 6250. The purpose of this order is to provide for
immediate and short-term protection.
   ●   A person who is in immediate and present danger of domestic violence
   ●   (Family Code Section 6211) and is in one of these relationships:
           ○ spouse or former spouse
           ○ current or former cohabitant (Family Code Section 6209)
           ○ engaged or formerly engaged people
           ○ dating or former dating partner (Family Code Section 6210)
           ○ parties with a child in common
           ○ a child of a party to domestic violence
           ○ persons related by consanguinity or affinity (within the second degree)
   ●   a child who is in immediate and present danger of:
           ○ physical, emotional, or sexual abuse
           ○ by a family or household member; or
           ○ being abducted by a parent or relative
   ●   A person who is in immediate and present danger of stalking by anyone (Penal Code
       Section 646.91, Family Code Section 6274)
   ●   a person in immediate and present danger of elder or dependent adult abuse by anyone,
       including physical abuse, neglect, abandonment, and failure of a care provider to provide
       needed goods or services

       D. Demonstrate how to enforce a court order

V. LEARNING NEED
A comprehensive investigation includes the collection of evidence and the documentation of
events, resulting in a detailed report of the domestic violence incident and investigative action.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
   A. Identify what information needs to be documented in a report
   B. Identify how the peace officer can provide support for the victim


LD 26 – Critical Incidents 8 hrs
I don’t think this section will actually be on the test, will come back to it…


LD 28 – Traffic Enforcement 16 hrs
I.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must know the principles of traffic law set forth in the California Vehicle
 Code to carry out their ​responsibilities in traffic enforcement.
    A. ​Explain the relevance of traffic enforcement to:
           a. ​Public safety and quality of life within a community
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                i.    Effective enforcement of traffic laws is challenging but may result in
                      positive relationships with communities when done by building trust and
                      showing respect.
                ii.   Understanding effective enforcement of traffic laws which may lead to the
                      discovery of additional traffic or criminal offenses.
          b. ​Legally establish probable cause for accomplishing general law enforcement
              objectives
                 i.   providing peace officers with probable cause to conduct enforcement
                      stops which may lead to the discovery of additional traffic or criminal
                      offenses

The California Vehicle Code is an indispensable tool in proactive law enforcement. In
addition, knowing the vehicle code gives the peace officer the ability to stop, detain, and
investigate additional criminal activity

   B. ​Explain the organization of information within the Vehicle Code
II. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers need to recognize their authority under the law to manage traffic
 effectively.
 ​A.​Discuss the elements and Vehicle Code section(s) governing arrest

Arrest Without a Warrant for DUI
Additionally, Vehicle Code Section 40300.5 notes a peace officer may, without a warrant, arrest
a person when the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person had been driving
while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, of any drug, or under the combined
influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug when any of the following exists:
• The person is involved in a traffic crash
• The person is observed in or about a vehicle that is obstructing a roadway
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• The person will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested
• The person may cause injury to himself or herself or damage property unless immediately
arrested
• The person may destroy or conceal evidence of the crime unless immediately arrested
NOTE: This is an exception to the general rule that a misdemeanor violation must occur in the
peace officer’s presence.

Vehicle Code Section 40300.6 permits an arrest without a warrant to be made within a
reasonable time and distance from the scene of a traffic crash.

There is no requirement that the peace officer be present at the time of the offense, but the
peace officer must have probable cause to believe the person committed the offense of driving
under the influence.

​B.​Differentiate between mandatory and optional appearances before a magistrate

Appearance before a magistrate is mandatory if a person has been arrested for a non-felony
Vehicle Code violation and when a person:
• fails to present both his or her driver’s license or other satisfactory evidence of his or her
identity and an unobstructed view of his or her full face for examination
• refuses to give a written promise to appear in court
• demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate
• is charged with violating Vehicle Code Section 23152 (DUI)

There are many Vehicle Code violations where an appearance before a magistrate is optional.
Under such circumstances, the arresting peace officer may give the person a notice to appear,
or take the person before the magistrate (i.e., arrest). (Vehicle Code Section 40302)
​C. ​Recognize the elements and common names for violations involving failure to obey
 the lawful orders of a ​peace officer or designated employee

Vehicle Code Section 2800(a) states that it is unlawful to:
• willfully fail or refuse to comply with
• any lawful order, signal, or direction
• of any peace officer
• who is in uniform and,
• performing duties under any provision of the Vehicle Code
Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




D.​Demonstrate effective use of hand signals, flashlights and other warning devices to
control traffic

When using hand signals to control or manage traffic, a peace officer should always remember
to:
• make eye contact with the driver, and
• give only one direction at a time

A peace officer’s flashlight can be used to direct traffic in an emergency at night.
When using a flashlight to direct traffic, a peace officer should:
• not stand directly in front of the approaching vehicle
• avoid blinding the motorist with flashlight beam
• use a fluorescent cone to enhance peace officer safety
When using a flashlight to halt traffic, a peace officer can:
• slowly swing the flashlight at arm’s length across the path of the approaching vehicle
• allow the flashlight beam to strike the pavement as an elongated spot of moving light that can
be readily seen by driver

Flares can be used to warn oncoming traffic in situations where hazards are:
• expected to last long enough to warrant taking the time
• on shoulder or side of road
• in a traffic lane (night or daytime)
Improper use of flares can add to the hazard. Flares should not be used:
• around flammable substance spills (gas, oil, etc.)
• in hazardous environmental conditions (dry grassy fields, high winds)
• when other environmental concerns exist (e.g., rain, Botts dots, or painted lane markings)

III. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must know the elements of the laws governing motor vehicles, bicycles
 and pedestrians.
    A. ​Recognize the elements and common names for traffic control signal and device
        violations involving:
            a. ​Red signal lights
                   i.  VC 21453(a)
                  ii.  A circular red light requires a driver to:
                             1. stop at a marked limit line
                                    a. if there is no limit line, stop before entering the near
                                         crosswalk
                                    b. if there is no crosswalk, stop before entering the
                                         intersection
                             2. remain stopped until the light has changed, and it is safe to
                                 proceed
                 iii.  VC 21453(b)
                 iv.   After stopping at a circular red light and yielding to traffic lawfully using
                       the intersection and pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk, a
                       driver may:
                             1. turn right or
                             2. turn left from a one-way street onto a one-way street
                             3. unless there is a sign prohibiting such movement
            b. ​Stop signs
                   i.  VC 22450(a)
                  ii.  The driver of any vehicle:
                 iii.  approaching a stop sign:
                             1. at the entrance to an intersection
                             2. within an intersection
                             3. at a railroad grade crossing
                 iv.   shall stop at a limit line, if marked
                  v.   otherwise before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
                       intersection
                 vi.   NOTE: If there is no limit line or crosswalk, the driver shall stop at the
                       entrance to the intersecting roadway or railroad grade crossing.
            c. ​Other traffic control signals and devices
                   i.  VC 21461(a) states that:
                  ii.  • it is unlawful for a driver
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                iii.   • to fail to obey any:
                            1. sign
                            2. signal device
                            3. local traffic ordinance or resolution
                            4. traffic control device
                iv.    NOTE: This statute may be used by peace officers when there is not a
                       more specific section available.
                 v.    NOTE: This section of the Vehicle Code does not apply to parking
                       violations.

​B. ​Recognize the elements and common names for right-of-way violations involving:

       ​1. ​Failure to yield the right-of-way

VC 21803(a) establishes the following process for obeying a yield sign. The driver of any
vehicle shall:
• yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which:
- have entered the intersection from an intersecting street
- are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, and
• continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles
- until the driver can proceed with reasonable safety

       ​2. ​Failure to yield to an emergency vehicle

Vehicle Code Section 21806(a)(1) requires that when an authorized emergency vehicle is
approaching while sounding the siren, and having at least one red light visible from 1,000 feet to
the front of the vehicle drivers shall:

• yield the right-of-way
• drive as near and parallel to the right-hand edge of the roadway
• stop clear of any intersection
• remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed
- unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer

​C. ​Recognize the elements and common names for rights and provisions involving
 bicyclists

VC 21202(a) states any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the
normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction at the same time shall ride as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of the following
situations:

• When overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
• When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
• When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not limited to, fixed or moving
objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes)
that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge, subject to the provisions of
Section 21656. For purposes of the section, a “substandard width lane” is a lane that is too
narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
• When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.

VC 21203 states no person riding upon any motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any streetcar or vehicle on
the roadway.

D. ​Recognize the elements and common names for violations involving pedestrians

VC 21950(a) - Crosswalks
A driver must yield to any pedestrian who is in a marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
NOTE: It is not necessary for the driver of the vehicle to wait until the pedestrian has
completely cleared the crosswalk to the other side before proceeding. Once
the pedestrian has moved far enough out of the way of the vehicle that the
possibility of conflict no longer exists, the vehicle can continue.

VC 21950(b) - Abuse of right-of-way
Establishes that pedestrians must not abuse the right-of-way. No pedestrian shall:
• suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle that is
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard
• unnecessarily stop or delay traffic while in a marked or unmarked crosswalk

Even in such situations, the driver has the duty to exercise due care for the safety of the
pedestrian (VC 21950(c)).

VC 21951 - Vehicle Stopped for a Pedestrian
When a vehicle has stopped to allow a pedestrian in a crosswalk to pass, that vehicle may block
the view of the pedestrian to approaching vehicles.
Whenever any vehicle has:
• stopped at a marked or unmarked crosswalk
- to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway
• the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
- shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle

E. ​Recognize the elements and common names for violations involving turning and
signaling

VC 22107 - Signaling Turns
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway until
such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after the giving of an
appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter in the event any other vehicle may be
affected by the movement.

Any signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning (VC 22108).
VC 22106 - Turns onto Highways
 States that no person shall:
• start a vehicle which is:
- stopped
- standing
- parked on a highway
• nor shall any person back a vehicle on a highway
- until such movement can be made with reasonable safety
NOTE: This section applies to starting and backing on a highway. A driver who started or
backed unsafely onto a highway from adjoining property and violated the right-of-way of a driver
on the highway would be in violation of VC 21804(a).

VC 22100.5 - U-turns
U-turns are permissible unless an official traffic control device prohibits the
turn. The turns must be made from the far left-hand lane lawfully available
when the intersection is controlled by official traffic signals or devices.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


F. ​Recognize the elements and common names for speed violations involving:

​1. ​Basic speed laws
      ● VC 22530
      ● prohibits driving a vehicle at a speed that is not reasonable and prudent (unsafe) for the
         prevailing conditions, when doing so endangers the safety of people or property

​2. ​Maximum speed

Generally, 65-mph is the maximum permissible speed in California.

Exceeding the 65-mph maximum speed limit is an infraction under Vehicle
Code Section 22349(a). No vehicle may be driven faster than 55-mph on a
two-lane, undivided highway unless it is posted otherwise (Vehicle Code
Section 22349(b)).

Driving in excess of 100-mph is an infraction citable under Vehicle Code
Section 22348(b).

When drivers violate the maximum speed limit, peace officers are not required
to prove that the speed was either unreasonable or unsafe.

G. ​Recognize the elements and common names for driving and passing violations
involving:

​1.​Following too closely

VC 21703 prohibits a driver from following another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable or prudent considering:
• speed
• traffic
• condition of roadway

​2.​Unsafe lane change

Vehicle Code Section 21658(a) prohibits unsafe lane changes and lane straddling. Whenever
any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic in one direction,
a vehicle:
• shall be driven, as nearly as is practical, entirely within a single lane and
• shall not be moved from the lane until such movement can be made with reasonable safety
NOTE: Per U.S. v. Colin, 314F.3d 439, police officers can stop to check
sobriety solely for weaving within a lane.
​3.​Passing on the right/left

Driving on the left
Four sub-sections of VC 21752 prohibit driving on the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
(a) When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver’s
view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction.
(b) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or
tunnel.
(c) When approaching within 100 feet of or when traversing any railroad grade crossing.
(d) When approaching within 100 feet or when traversing any intersection.

This section does not apply on a one-way roadway.
VC 21750 states that a driver overtaking another vehicle or bicycle (unless on a one-way
highway) shall:
• pass to the left at a safe distance
• without interfering with the safe operation of the overtaken vehicle

Attempting to pass another vehicle on the left without sufficient clearance while on a two-lane
highway is an infraction (VC 21751).

Passing on the right
A driver may overtake or pass another vehicle upon the right only when conditions make it safe
to do so.
It is unlawful to pass on the right by driving off the paved or main-traveled portion of the roadway
(e.g., using the shoulder of the road) (VC 21755).

​4.​Passing a stopped school bus

    ●   VC 22454(a) requires a driver approaching or overtaking a school bus which has
        stopped to load or unload school children
    ●    is displaying its flashing red lights and the stop signal arm, if so equipped
    ●   shall stop and remain stopped until the lights cease operation
    ●   on a highway or private roadway

The driver of a vehicle upon a divided or multiple-lane highway need not stop upon approaching
or overtaking a school bus:
• that is upon the other roadway
• when stopped at an intersection controlled by a traffic officer or official traffic control signal (VC
22454(b))

H. ​Recognize the elements and common names for public offense violations involving:

​1. ​Reckless driving

VC 23103(a) states that:
• any person
• who drives a vehicle upon a highway
• in willful or wanton disregard
• for the safety of persons or property
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


• is guilty of reckless driving

This law also applies to driving recklessly in any off-street parking facility (VC 23103(b)).

Examples of reckless driving include:
• driving at a high speed and changing lanes without regard for safety
• speeding through a parking area forcing pedestrians to move quickly out of the way

Violation of VC 23103 is a misdemeanor.
However, if the act of reckless driving of a vehicle has caused bodily injury to
any other person other than the driver, the punishment may be enhanced
(VC 23104(a)).

If the driver has had previous convictions for reckless driving, speed contests,
or DUI, the current offense of reckless driving causing great bodily injury is a
felony (VC 23104(b)).

​2. ​Speed contests
 A speed contest can involve a single vehicle racing against the clock, timing device, or two or
 more vehicles racing against each other (i.e., drag racing).

It is a misdemeanor offense for any person to engage in any motor vehicle speed contest on a
highway. (Vehicle Code Section 23109(a))

Aiding or abetting in any motor vehicle speed contest on a highway is also a misdemeanor
offense. (Vehicle Code Section 23109(b))

NOTE: Organized Road rallies of over 20 miles, in which vehicles do not exceed speed limits,
are exempt from the violations noted under Vehicle Code Section 23109.

​3. ​Hand-held wireless telephone
 Vehicle Code Section 23123(a) states that:
 a person shall not drive a motor vehicle:
 • while using a wireless telephone unless it is specifically designed and
 • configured to allow hands free listening and talking or used in that manner while driving

​4.​Electronic wireless communications device
 Vehicle Code Section 23123.5 states that:
 a person shall not drive a motor vehicle while holding and operating an electronic wireless
 communications device:
 • unless the electronic device is specifically designed and configured to allow voice-operated
 and hands-free, and it is used in that manner while driving.

NOTE: “Driving” includes stopped in traffic or at a red light.
NOTE: Driver’s hand is used to activate or de-activate a feature or function of the device with a
single swipe or tap.
NOTE: For purposes of this section, “electronic wireless communications device” includes, but is
not limited to, a broadband personal communication device, specialized mobile radio device,
handheld device or laptop computer with mobile data access, pager, and two-way messaging
device.

​I. ​Recognize the elements and common names for hit and run violations
 Misdemeanor Hit and Run
 Vehicle Code Section 20002(a) requires that a driver involved in a crash resulting only in
 property damage shall:
 • immediately stop at the scene
 • locate the owner or person in charge of the property damaged
 • provide name and address of driver and registered owner
 • on request, show driver’s license and vehicle registration

Felony Hit and Run
Vehicle Code Section 20001(a) requires:
• the driver of any vehicle involved in a crash resulting in:
- injury to any person other than himself
- death of any person
• shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the crash
• fulfill certain requirements based on whether the crash involves an injury, a death, and/or
property damage

​J. ​Recognize the elements and common names for basic motor vehicle licensing
 requirements

Vehicle Code Section 12500(a) - no license
states that no person shall:
• drive a motor vehicle upon a highway
• without being licensed
• except persons expressly exempted
Violation of this statute is a misdemeanor.

Vehicle Code Section 12951(a) - license not in possession
states that a:
• driver must have a valid license
• in that person’s immediate possession
• at all times when driving a motor vehicle upon a highway
Violation of this statute is an infraction.
NOTE: A photograph or printed copy is not sufficient.

Vehicle Code Section 12951(b) - presenting license
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


states that it is unlawful for a driver to:
• refuse to present their driver’s license
• upon the demand of a peace officer
Violation of this statute is a misdemeanor.

Vehicle Code Section 12500(d) - out of class
It is unlawful for a person to:
• drive a motor vehicle, or combination of vehicles
• without the proper classification of license
Violation of this statute is an infraction.

Motorcycle License
It is unlawful for a person to drive any:
- motorcycle
- motor-driven cycle
- motorized bicycle
• on a highway
• unless holding a license or endorsement for that class (Vehicle Code Section 12500(b))
NOTE: Any person with a valid California driver’s license may operate a motorized bicycle on a
short-term rental of 48 hours or less. (Vehicle Code Section 12804.9(h))

​K. ​Recognize the elements and common names for violations when driving with a
 suspended or revoked license

Suspended or revoked license for reckless driving or negligent operator
Vehicle Code Section 14601(a) states that:
• no person shall drive at any time
• when that person’s privilege to drive
• is suspended or revoked for reckless driving (Vehicle Code Section 23103), and
• the person so driving has been notified of the suspension or revocation

Suspension for driving under the influence
Vehicle Code Section 14601.2(a) states that no person shall drive a motor vehicle when:
• that person’s driving privilege has been suspended or revoked
• for a conviction of a violation of:
- driving under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or driving under the influence of a drug
(Vehicle Code Sections 23152 or 23153)
• if that person so driving has knowledge of the suspension or revocation
Except in full compliance with the restriction no person shall drive a motor vehicle at any time
when:
• that person’s driving privileges are restricted, if
• the person has knowledge of the restriction (Vehicle Code Section 14601.2(b))

Suspension for refusing chemical/ alcohol test
Vehicle Code Section 14601.5(a) states that no person shall drive a motor vehicle at any time:
• when that person’s driving privilege has been suspended or revoked because of:
- refusing or failing to complete a chemical test (Vehicle Code Section 13353)
- refusing or failing to complete a preliminary alcohol screening test (Vehicle Code Section
13353.1)
- driving with an excessive blood alcohol level (Vehicle Code Section 13353.2)
• the person has knowledge of the suspension or revocation

​L. ​Recognize the elements and common names for basic motor vehicle registration
 requirements

Vehicle Code Section 4000(a)(1) states that no person shall:
• drive
• move
• leave standing upon:
- a highway
- an off-street public parking facility Vehicle Code Section 4000 (a)(2)
• any vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, pole or pipe dolly, or logging dolly
• unless it is registered, and fees paid or registered under the permanent trailer identification
program
NOTE: New residents must register their vehicle(s) within 20 days of establishing residency or
accepting gainful employment in the state. (Vehicle Code Section 6700)

The owner of a vehicle is required to keep the registration card or a copy with
the vehicle for which it was issued, except during the registration process or
when the vehicle is left unattended. (Vehicle Code Section 4454(a) and (b)

The registered owner of a vehicle must notify the DMV within 10 days of a
change of address (Vehicle Code Section 4159) and insert the new address on
the registration card. (Vehicle Code Section 4160)

License Plate Requirements
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
M. ​Recognize the elements and common names for basic vehicle equipment
requirements for motor vehicles ​driven upon highways

Lighting
Darkness is defined as any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise,
or when visibility is not sufficient to see a person or vehicle at a distance of 1,000 feet. (Vehicle
Code Section 280)

During darkness, a vehicle shall be equipped with lighted lighting equipment as required for that
specific type of vehicle. (Vehicle Code Section 24250)

All required lighting equipment installed on a vehicle shall be maintained in good working order.
This includes lamps with bulbs of the correct voltage, functioning lamps, or reflectors, etc.
(Vehicle Code Section 24252)

NOTE: There are vehicle code exceptions for antique cars.

Headlamps
All motor vehicles, except motorcycles and vehicles manufactured prior to 1930, must:
• have at least two headlamps, one on each side of the vehicle
• the lamps must be between 22 and 54 inches in height from the ground
(Vehicle Code Section 24400(a)(1))
• have headlamps on when wipers are in continuous use

Both headlamps must be lighted
• during darkness
• or inclement weather (Vehicle Code Section 24400(b))

Flashing lights
• flashing lights are prohibited on vehicles except as otherwise permitted
• flashing lights are permitted on vehicles to:
- indicate an intention to turn or move right or left upon a roadway
- indicate a disabled or parked vehicle off the roadway but within ten feet of the roadway
- warn other motorists of crashes or hazards on the roadway
- warn other motorists of funeral processions
- use on Authorized Emergency Vehicles
- vehicle disabled on a roadway
- side lamps permitted and used in conjunction with turn signal lamps
- lamps on a trailer or semi-trailer after broken away from towing vehicle
- may be flashed in a repeated series of short and long flashes when driver needs help
***good PC if a person's lights are flashing for no reason

Exhaust Systems
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler that is properly
maintained and contains no cutout or bypass type device. (Vehicle Code Section 27150(a))
No motor vehicle shall be operated in a manner resulting in excessive smoke or flame. (Vehicle
Code Section 27153)
NOTE: Correction of exhaust system violations must be certified by an authorized motor vehicle
Pollution Control Device Inspection station.

Obstructed View - (tinted windows, stickers, boxes in backseat obstructing view)
No person shall drive a motor vehicle with any object or material placed, displayed, installed,
affixed, or applied in or upon a vehicle in such a way that it obstructs or reduces the driver’s
clear view. (Vehicle Code Section 26708(a)(1))
This restriction applies to materials:
• upon the windshield, side, or rear windows
• in or upon the vehicle itself
There are several exemptions to this requirement which include, but are not limited to:
• rearview mirrors
• adjustable nontransparent sun visors
• side windows to the rear of the driver
• rear trunk lid handle or hinges, etc.
• signs/stickers displayed in a five-inch square in the lower corner of the windshield nearest the
driver; this is to include GPS devices affixed in this area
• signs/stickers displayed in a seven-inch square in the lower corner of windshield farthest from
the driver; this is to include GPS devices affixed in this area

General Unsafe Conditions or a Load is not Safely Secured
Vehicle Code Sections 24002(a) and (b) state that it is unlawful to operate any vehicle which:
• is in an unsafe condition
• is not safely loaded
• presents an immediate safety hazard
• is not equipped as required
Vehicle Code Section 24002 can be used to:
• cite for violations not specifically covered in other sections of the code, or
• when a vehicle has multiple equipment violations

Seatbelts
With the intent to reduce highway deaths and injuries, the state legislature established a
mandatory seatbelt law which requires:
• the driver and
• all passengers 16 years of age or older
• to be properly restrained by seatbelts
• when the vehicle is being operated on a highway (Vehicle Code Section 27315)




Children in a Car Seat
Vehicle Code Section 27360 requires that all children under the age of eight years old to be
secured in a rear seat in an appropriate child passenger restraint system.

All children ages eight to sixteen are required to be properly restrained by seatbelts when the
vehicle is being operated on a highway.
NOTE: Not required in vehicles exempt from seatbelt law.
The Vehicle Code Section to cite for a violation of child restraint laws can vary depending on the
violator. The following table identifies two sections that are commonly used.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




Passengers in a Truck
VC 23116(a) - used to cite the driver
• no person driving a pickup truck or flatbed motor-truck on a highway shall transport any person
in or on the back of the truck
VC 23116(b) - used to cite the passenger
• no person shall ride in or on the back of a truck being driven on a highway

IV.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must know the legal authorities to impound and store vehicles as
 authorized in the Vehicle Code.

Storage of a vehicle from public or private property.
When a vehicle is stored, the vehicle can be released to the owner, or
authorized agent with proper identification, pending any fees (e.g., fines,
towing fees, etc.).

Impound of a vehicle from public or private property while an investigation is
still in progress, when forfeiture, or 30-day hold procedures are in progress
(stipulated vehicle release, SVR).
When a vehicle is impounded, the law enforcement agency that authorized the
impound can decide when and to whom the car is released.
NOTE: Inventory policies vary from agency to agency. Consult agency
guidelines.
NOTE: The intent of storing or impounding a vehicle is to improve
public safety.
   A. ​Recognize a peace officer’s legal authority to remove vehicles
The following are authoritative sections of the vehicle code that allows us to take people’s
vehicles; they are not chargeable sections.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
V. ​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must know the laws to detect and apprehend drivers whose behavior
 indicates that they may be driving ​under the influence of any alcoholic beverage and/or
 any drug.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


A.​Recognize the elements and common names for violations involving the possession of
alcoholic beverages ​in a motor vehicle
Drinking, smoking, ingesting in a motor vehicle
Even if alcohol consumption has not reached the level that constitutes driving under the
influence, an individual may still be guilty of drinking while driving. Vehicle Code Section
23220(a) states:
• no person shall
• drink any alcoholic beverage, or
• smoke/ingest marijuana or any marijuana product
• while driving a motor vehicle on any lands as described in Vehicle Code
Section 23220(c)
• 23220(b) prevents a passenger from doing any of the above.
It is also an infraction to drink any alcoholic beverage or smoke/ingest marijuana while in a
motor vehicle that is being driven upon a highway.
Vehicle Code Section 23221(a) prohibits the driver while driving
Vehicle Code Section 23221(b) prohibits the passenger while riding

Exception: This section does not apply to a passenger in any bus, taxicab, or limousine for hire
or the living quarters of a house car or camper. [Vehicle Code Section 23229(a)]
***this is only an exception to drinking, can't hotbox because then the driver gets contact high

Possession of marijuana/open container while driving
It is also an infraction to possess marijuana or an open container of alcohol in the vehicle while
driving that vehicle even though the driver is not actually drinking the alcohol or using the drug
at the time.
Vehicle Code Section 23222(a) states:
• no person
• shall have on their person
• while driving a motor vehicle upon a highway or lands as described in 23220(c)
• any receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage
• which has:
- been opened
- had the seal broken
- had the contents partially removed

Vehicle Code Section 23222(b) states:
• no person
• shall possess on their person marijuana
• which has been opened or a seal broken or loose cannabis flower
• while driving a motor vehicle.
• Possession of any amount (on their person) is an infraction.

NOTE: Unless the driver demands to be taken before a magistrate, the driver shall be released
on a written promise to appear in court upon satisfactory evidence of identity and shall not be
subjected to booking.
NOTE: Unauthorized possession of a controlled substance is also a violation of Health and
Safety Code 11357. For further information on violations relating to controlled substances, refer
to LD 12: Controlled Substances.

Possession of alcohol by persons under the age of 18
If a person under the age of 21 years possesses alcohol in a motor vehicle, that person may be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Vehicle Code Sections 23224(a) and (b) state that:
• no person under the age of 21 years shall
• knowingly drive any motor vehicle
• carrying any alcoholic beverage
Vehicle Code Section 23224(b) applies to all passengers under the age of 21.
Vehicle Code Section 23224 provides exemptions to this requirement for underage persons who
are:
• accompanied by a parent or legal guardian
• employed by an ABC licensee
• driving the motor vehicle during regular hours in the course of the underage person’s
employment

NOTE: If the driver or passenger was unaccompanied, he or she shall have a complete defense
if he or she were following in a timely manner the reasonable instructions of a parent, legal
guardian, responsible adult relative, or adult designee relating to the disposition of the alcoholic
beverage.

Storage of Open Container
It is an infraction for the owner or driver of a vehicle to allow an open container of alcohol in the
passenger area of a motor vehicle. Vehicle Code Section 23225(a)(1) states that:
• it is unlawful for the registered owner (or driver if the registered owner is not present in the
vehicle)
• of any motor vehicle upon a highway or public lands
• to keep any bottle, can, or other receptacle
• containing any alcoholic beverage that has:
- been opened, or
- had the seal removed, or
- had the contents partially removed
• in the vehicle
NOTE: Public land is land which is open and accessible to the public. (Vehicle Code Section
38001(a))
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


​B.​Explain the meaning of the phrase “under the influence”

​C.​Recognize the elements and common names for violations involving Driving Under the
 Influence (DUI)

D.​Recognize driving that might indicate a driver of a vehicle may be under the influence of any
alcoholic​beverage and/or any drug

E.​Recognize the indications of driving under the influence of any alcoholic beverage and/or drug
a peace ​officer may observe upon making contact with a driver

​F.​Discuss medical conditions that may cause a person to appear under the influence

​G.​Recognize appropriate peace officer actions if a subject refuses to cooperate in performing a
 Field Sobriety ​Test (FST)

H.​Demonstrate FSTs that may be used to determine impairment, to include:

        ​1.​Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus (HGN)
         ​2.​One-Leg Stand (OLS)
          ​3.​Walk & Turn (WAT)
​I.​Discuss the primary elements included in the statutory admonition read to drivers who refuse
 to submit to ​chemical testing


LD 37 – People with Disabilities 4 hrs
  I.    LEARNING NEED


Peace officers must understand the laws affecting, and the peace officers responsibility to protect, the
rights of people with disabilities.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES


    A. State the intent of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990


The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (42 US Code 2101 et seq.) and the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 504, were written to provide clear and comprehensive
mandates for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with mental and physical
impairments.


   B. Recognize the role of peace officers when interacting with a person with a disabilities
         1. Applying culturally responsive community policing principles
         2. Reducing stigma
         3. Increasing and maintaining peace officer and public safety
   ●   Although it is not the role of or within the capacity of peace officers to attempt to
       diagnose a person’s disability, officers need to recognize cues and other indicators in
       order to make appropriate decisions regarding intervention strategies.
   ●   In order to reduce stigma, the officer should avoid prejudging the contact and remain
       aware of an underlying disability. It is every peace officer’s responsibility to treat
       everyone with respect and integrity no matter what their disability, race, creed, gender
       identity, or religion.
   ●   To the extent possible, responding officers should observe the behavior exhibited by the
       person in an effort to determine what is happening and what might be prompting the
       observed behavior.
   ●   Any type of call for peace officer assistance may potentially involve a person with a
       disability. Officers must not allow stigmas, stereotypes, or prejudices to cloud decisions
       on intervention, investigation, and/or enforcement.


II. LEARNING NEED


In order to make appropriate decisions regarding intervention strategies, peace officers
must be able to recognize, based on behavioral cues and other indicators, people with
intellectual/developmental disabilities.


   1. State the intent of the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Service Act (Welfare
      and Institutions Code Sections 4500 et.seq.)
The Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act was written to establish the State of
California’s responsibility for, and the coordination of, services for people with
Intellectual/Developmental Disabilities (I/DD). The author’s intent was to maximize, to the extent
feasible, the services available throughout the state and to prevent the dislocation of people with
I/DD from their home communities. These services are coordinated statewide through a system
of 21 regional centers.
Regional centers offer the following services in part:
    ● Case management
    ● Emergency/residential relocation
    ● Forensic/functional capacity assessments
    ● Independent living services
    ● Medical authorization/medical support
    ● Alternative sentencing options
    ● Cost of transportation/housing/special diets
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


NOTE: These facilities are non-crisis and non-medical.


   2. Define the term developmental disability
A developmental disability means a disability which:
manifests before an individual attains age 18
continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual (Welfare and Institutions Code Section
4512(a))


   3. Recognize general behavioral indicators associated with all developmental
      disabilities
The behaviors associated with intellectual/developmental disabilities vary by individual and the
type and extent of each specific disability.
General behavioral indicators can include, but are not limited to:
    ● confusion and/or disorientation
    ● slow response to commands/directions/questions
    ● slurred speech and/or other speech disorders
    ● muscle control difficulty
    ● limited mobility
    ● seizure disorders
    ● lethargy
    ● self-endangering behavior
    ● inappropriate responses to a situation
    ● lack of awareness of dangerous situations
    ● inability to understand and/or respond to commands, directions, and
    ● questions
    ● sensitivity to touch/sound
NOTE: Behavioral indicators for specific disabilities are noted in later portions of this chapter.


   4. Recognize behavioral indicators specifically associated with the following
      developmental disabilities:
The following table identifies several behavioral cues and indicators which may lead an officer to
believe that a person is affected by intellectual disability.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



NOTE:
Approximately 90 percent of all individuals affected by intellectual disability are considered to be
mildly impaired.
Officers must always take into account that each individual is different and may have different
levels of skills and abilities depending on the severity of the intellectual disability.



   1. Intellectual Disability (including Down Syndrome)

Intellectual disability, formerly mental retardation, is characterized by below-average intelligence
or cognitive ability and a lack of skills necessary for day-to-day living. People with intellectual
disabilities can and do learn new skills, but they learn them more slowly. There are varying
degrees of intellectual disability, from mild to profound.
Intellectual disability is not the same as mental illness.


   2. Cerebral Palsy


The word cerebral refers to the brain. The word palsy describes a disorder that impairs control
of body movement. The term cerebral palsy refers to a large group of chronic conditions that
affect an individual’s body movements and coordination. Because of the lack of muscle control,
the condition can also affect speech, hearing, vision, bowel/bladder control and
eating/swallowing.



   3. Autism Spectrum Disorder - Autism spectrum disorder is an ongoing I/DD usually evident by early
      childhood that affects the ability to function and interact with others and the environment. It is
      more commonly seen in males than females.
           a. Symptoms
                  i. Difficulty relating to people
                 ii.  Aversion to being touched, especially by strangers
                iii.  Sensitivity to noise
                iv.   May act as if hurt when touched lightly, while totally ignoring painful
                     injuries
                 v.   May cover their eyes or ears to prevent unpleasant stimulus
               vi.    May appear to be fascinated by shiny objects (e.g., an officer’s badge,
                     safety lights)
               vii.   Repetitive movements (e.g., rocking, spinning, hand twisting, etc.)
              viii.  Few social skills
               ix.   Social isolation
                x.   Impaired communication skills
               xi.   Echolalia (repeating what others say)
              xii.   May be nonresponsive to questions and or commands
              xiii.  May stare or avoid eye contact
              xiv.   May not recognize appropriate physical or social boundaries/cues
              xv.    Insistence that the environment and daily routine remain exactly the
                    same
           xvi.      Possible limited intellectual ability
          xvii.      Tantrums, self-stimulation, or self-mutilation
          xviii.     Eating nonfood items or objects
           xix.      Inability to respond to commands, directions, and questions
       b. Officers should keep the following points in mind if they are required to arrest a
           person with autism spectrum disorder.
               i.   When physical contact is necessary, force may be required because
                    individuals with autism spectrum disorder may react violently to physical
                    contact or changes in environment or routine
              ii.   Advise jail/medical staff to contact the local regional center as soon as
                    possible for further information and alternative placement assistance
             iii.    The use of physical restraint may unintentionally cause individuals with
                    autism spectrum disorder to harm themselves or others in an attempt to
                    avoid restraint
             iv.     When possible, explain in simple clear terms, the chain of events that will
                    occur with detention and/or arrest
       c. Example: An officer responded to a call regarding a suspicious boy who had
           been sitting on the edge of a fountain at the entrance of a local museum. The boy
           failed to respond when the officer spoke to him. As the officer approached the
           boy she saw that he was rocking back and forth and wringing his hands. The boy
           avoided any eye contact and did not appear to be aware of the officer’s
           presence. The officer thought that the boy might be autistic. She did not attempt
           to touch him. The officer attempted to identify the boy and contact family
           members.
4. Epilepsy
       a. Epilepsy is a brain disorder that causes people to have recurring seizures. The
          seizures happen when clusters of nerve cells (neurons) in the brain send out the
          wrong signals.
       b. A seizure is a symptom of a brain problem. They happen because of sudden,
          abnormal electrical activity in the brain. If only part of the brain is affected, it may
          cloud awareness, block normal communication, and produce a variety of
          undirected, unorganized movements.
       c. Indicators of a seizure
             i.   staring spells
            ii.    disorientation
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                iii.   lethargy
                iv.    slurred speech
                 v.    staggering or impaired gait
                vi.    tic-like movements
               vii.    rhythmic movements of the head (e.g., jerking uncontrollably)
               viii.   purposeless sounds and body movements
                ix.    dropping of the head
                 x.    lack of response
                xi.    eyes rolling upward
               xii.    lip smacking, chewing, or swallowing movements
               xiii.   partial or complete loss of consciousness
               xiv.    picking at clothing
               xv.     bluish skin tone
              xvi.     urination
           d. Example: While on patrol, two officers were stopped by a man who stated that
              there was a woman on the sidewalk who seemed to be “sick or something.”
              When the officers approached, they saw the woman on the ground. She was
              unconscious and jerking back and forth. One officer recognized that the woman
              was experiencing a seizure and told his partner to keep everyone else away
              while he contacted EMS. The officer took steps to ensure the woman’s safety.
              After a couple of minutes the woman’s actions stopped. When the woman
              regained consciousness, the officer reassured her that it was all right and that
              medical aid was on the way. The woman appeared to be dazed and confused so
              the officers remained with her until medical personnel arrived and assisted her.


       E. Recognize appropriate peace officer response(s) during field contacts with
people with the following developmental disabilities:

   1. Intellectual Disability (including Down Syndrome)
An officer’s course of action during a field contact with a person affected by intellectual disability
will depend on that individual’s mental capacity. The following table identifies many guidelines
for officers.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
   2. Cerebral Palsy
An officer’s course of action during a field contact with a person affected with cerebral palsy will
depend on that individual’s cognitive capacity. The following table identifies several guidelines
for officers.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



  3.   Autism Spectrum Disorder
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




   4. Epilepsy
           a. Convulsions, confusion, and episodes of agitated behavior during an episode
              should not be perceived as deliberate hostility or resistance to the officer.
           b. After the seizure has ended, individuals may experience a period of post- seizure
              confusion. Officers should remain with the individual until the individual is
              reoriented to the surroundings or in the care of a responsible person.
           c. Depriving medications could trigger a seizure. Officers should be guided by
              agency policy regarding the administration of prescribed medications.


       F. Recognize the causes and nature of intellectual/developmental disabilities

The term intellectual disability refers to a below average intellectual functioning or deficits in
adaptive behavior. Individuals affected by intellectual disability have a limited capacity to learn
which may have been caused by a birth defect, deprivation in early childhood, disease,
consumption of toxins or poisons, or numerous other reasons.
Intellectual disability is not the same as mental illness.


       G. Discuss the referral process and state/local resources available to people with
intellectual/developmental disabilities
Several resource services are available to peace officers and individuals with mental illness,
physical disabilities, and developmental disabilities. Examples of the types of resources
available include but are not limited to the following:
    ● Agency-related assessment or crisis teams
    ● Private organizations offering support groups
    ● Substance abuse facilities
    ● County mental health agencies
    ● Community counseling centers
    ● Regional developmental disabilities centers
    ● Independent/assisted living centers
    ● National support/information organizations such as the National Alliance
    ● for the Mentally Ill (NAMI)
    ● Local missions or shelters
    ● Faith based organizations
    ● Senior citizens centers or dependent adult resources
    ● Veterans Administration
NOTE: Peace officers should become familiar with the organizations that are available within
their respective regions.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


III. LEARNING NEED


In order to make appropriate decisions and serve those with physical disabilities, peace officers must be
able to recognize indicators of people with physical disabilities.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES


    A. Recognize behavioral indicators specifically associated with the following neurological disorders,
       including:
    1. Acquired = An acquired neurological disorder can be the result of any of a number of illnesses.
       Two of the most common of these disorders are stroke and dementia.
    2. Traumatic
            a. Traumatic neurological disorders are caused by injury to the brain or spinal cord
               due to military combat, a vehicle accident, sports injury, fall, act of violence, or
               any number of other forms of trauma.
            b. One type of injury is Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI). TBI may be caused by a bump,
               blow to the head, violent shaking, or pressure wave from an explosion. This
               sudden movement causes the brain to move quickly back and forth within the
               skull, damaging brain cells and creating chemical changes to the brain. This
               altered state can result in an impairment of the individual’s cognitive abilities,
               physical functioning, and/or emotional functioning.


B. Recognize appropriate peace officer response(s) and methods of communication during field contacts
with people who are:


     1. Affected by traumatic disorders
             a. Neurological
Peace officers come in contact with people affected by dementia or stroke. They may appear to be
intoxicated (e.g., slurred speech, lack of motor function, disorientation, non-responsive or slow to
respond) and this may require further investigation to determine the cause.
The success of an officer’s contact with a person who is affected is often determined by the officer’s
conduct during the first moments of an encounter.
Gather additional information regarding the person’s condition from:
- bystanders who may have observed the person’s behavior over a span
of time
- family members or acquaintances
- medical alert bracelets or necklaces
- other forms of medical alert information that person may carry


            b. traumatic brain injuries

Officers are not trained to diagnose TBI, but should watch for the possible symptoms to be able
to refer the person to seek medical assistance.
 Awareness of the signs and symptoms of TBI.
 May initially appear to be intoxicated.
 TBI is not just restricted to military veterans; it can include anyone
who has gone through any traumatic event (e.g., traffic accident,
sexual assault, combat situations, etc).
 Peace officers should provide information to the public on available
local resources (e.g., Veterans Administration (VA), local resources, county veterans’ service
office), and Internet resources to help educate such as www.nimh.nih.gov.
 If a head injury is a recent event, brain swelling or other injury is a possibility and requires
immediate medical attention
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



     Field Contacts
                i.  Officers are not trained to diagnose TBI, but should watch for the possible
                    symptoms to be able to refer the person to seek medical assistance.
              ii.    Awareness of the signs and symptoms of TBI.
             iii.    May initially appear to be intoxicated.
             iv.     TBI is not just restricted to military veterans; it can include anyone who
                    has gone through any traumatic event (e.g., traffic accident,sexual
                    assault, combat situations, etc).
              v.    Peace officers should provide information to the public on available local
                    resources (e.g., Veterans Administration (VA), local resources, county
                    veterans’ service office), and Internet resources to help educate such as
                    www.nimh.nih.gov.
             vi.    If a head injury is a recent event, brain swelling or other injury is a
                    possibility and requires immediate medical attention.
         c. Officer safety
               i.   When making any contact with a person using a mobility aid, officers must
                    always be aware of their personal safety and the safety of others. It is
                    important to remember that even though the person may be disabled, that
                    person may be capable of injuring the officer or others.
              ii.   Officers should consider any piece of mobility equipment as an extension
                    of the person. Such devices should be searched at the same time the
                    person is being searched. These devices may be used to
                    conceal/smuggle contraband and weapons.
             iii.   Officers should also consider devices that can extend the reach of the
                    individual and take these devices into consideration when establishing a
                    safety zone (e.g., canes, crutches, etc.).



  2. Affected by dementia and stroke
         a. Peace officers come in contact with people affected by dementia or stroke. They
            may appear to be intoxicated (e.g., slurred speech, lack of motor function,
            disorientation, non-responsive or slow to respond) and this may require further
            investigation to determine the cause.
         b. The success of an officer’s contact with a person who is affected is often
            determined by the officer’s conduct during the first moments of an encounter.
         c. Gather additional information regarding the person’s condition from:
                   i.   bystanders who may have observed the person’s behavior over a span of
                        time
                  ii.   family members or acquaintances
                 iii.   medical alert bracelets or necklaces
                 iv.    other forms of medical alert information that person may carry


C. List the types of mobility assistance equipment and devices
    ●   canes
    ●    crutches
    ●    walkers
    ●    braces
    ●    prosthesis
    ●    motorized scooters
    ●    manual or motorized wheelchairs
    ●    service dogs
    ●    personal attendants
    ●   People with severe spinal cord injuries may also use mobile respiratory devices or other
        equipment necessary for bodily support.

Example: Officers were called to investigate a report of a man ranting and cursing in front of a
restaurant. His actions were scaring patrons away. When the officers asked questions he had
trouble comprehending what was being said, had trouble speaking, and became increasingly
agitated. The officers directed him away from the restaurant to quieter surroundings and allowed
him to maintain his personal space. Only one officer gave directions or asked questions, using a
calm, firm, and non-threatening approach. The officer directed the man to stop yelling and
proceeded to ask questions one at a time. The man gradually calmed down. He revealed that
he had sustained a brain injury from a car accident several years earlier. He was supposed to
meet a friend at the restaurant for lunch, but the friend had not shown up. He was frustrated and
angry because he wanted to call his friend, but couldn’t remember the phone number. He told
the officers that since his accident he sometimes goes into a rage when frustrated. The
restaurant manager did not want to press charges and the man agreed to go home.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


D. Recognize behavioral or other indicators that may lead an officer to identify a person as being:


1. Blind or visually impaired
2. Deaf or hard of hearing
    ●   use of signing
    ●    wearing hearing aid(s)
    ●    use of a signal dog
    ●    speaking with difficulty or in an unconventional method
    ●    pointing to an ear and shaking the head negatively
    ●    pointing to an ear and then the lips
    ●    reaching for a pad and pencil
    ●    failing to respond to an officer’s questions or statements
    ●    failing to follow an officer’s instructions or commands
    ●    attempting to gain attention through body movement or touching (e.g.,
    ●   foot stomping, hand waving, clapping hands, etc.)


E. Recognize appropriate peace officer response(s) and methods of communication during field contacts
with people who are:


    1. Blind or visually impaired
            a. By law, a service animal must be allowed to accompany the individual anywhere
               the individual goes (with the exception of some animal parks and zoos). Some
               service animals are protective of their owners. Officers should convey any
               actions to the animal’s owner first so the owner can caution or calm the animal if
               necessary. Care should be taken not to separate the animal from its. owner.
            b. Officers must be aware that people with visual impairment are capable of
               compensating for their limited sight by relying on hearing, touch, and other
               senses. Sight may be an important means of identifying people, the environment,
               or objects, but it is not the only means. Officers should never discount a person
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


          with a visual impairment as a credible witness.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
   2. Deaf or hard of hearing

Assessing the best way to communicate should be the officers’ first task upon recognizing that
an individual is deaf or hard of hearing. When coming in contact at a traffic stop or any other
location, officers should take their cue from the individual regarding that individual’s preferred
method of communication.

   ●   Written communication
   ●   Lip reading
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


  ●   Hearing aids
  ●   Partial hearing
  ●   Sign translators
  ●   TTY/TDD(transmit typewritten messages)
  ●   California relay service
F. Discuss additional laws that protect the rights of people with physical disabilities, including:


    1. Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 504
             a. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (42 US Code 2101 et seq.)
                and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 504, were written to provide clear and
                comprehensive mandates for the elimination of discrimination against individuals
                with mental and physical impairments.
    2. Right of way (Vehicle Code Section 21963)
             a. Vehicle Code Section 21963 stipulates that: a pedestrian totally or partially blind
                who is carrying a predominantly white cane (with or without a red tip) or using a
                guide dog shall have the right-of-way The driver of any vehicle approaching a
                person using a white cane or guide dog who fails to yield or take reasonable
                necessary precautions to avoid injury to the person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
    3. White Cane Law (Civil Code Section 54.4)
             a. Individuals who are blind or visually impaired are not required to carry a white
                cane (with or without a red tip) or to use a guide dog. Civil Code Section 54.4
                stipulates that a totally or partially blind pedestrian shall have all the rights and
                privileges conferred by law upon other people in any of the places,
                accommodations, or conveyances specified in Civil Code Sections 54 and 54.1,
                even when that individual is not carrying a white cane or using a guide dog.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


  4. Service Animals (Penal Code Section 365.5 et. seq.)
G. Discuss the referral process and state/local resources available to people with physical disabilities

    ●   Agency-related assessment or crisis teams
    ●    Private organizations offering support groups
    ●    Substance abuse facilities
    ●    County mental health agencies
    ●    Community counseling centers
    ●    Regional developmental disabilities centers
    ●    Independent/assisted living centers
    ●    National support/information organizations such as the National Alliance for the Mentally
        Ill (NAMI)
    ●    Local missions or shelters
    ●    Faith based organizations
    ●    Senior citizens centers or dependent adult resources
    ●    Veterans Administration
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


IV.      LEARNING NEED


In order to make appropriate decisions regarding intervention strategies, peace officers must be able to
recognize, based on behavioral cues and other indicators, people with mental illness.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES


      A. Define the term mental illness

How peace officers respond to persons living with a mental disorder can have tremendous
impact on how these encounters will be resolved. The basic philosophy of any law enforcement
officer should be to respond in a manner that is humane, compassionate, and supportive.

Mental illnesses are a medical condition that affect a person’s thinking, feeling, mood, ability to
relate to others, and disrupts daily functioning. Persons managing a mental illness can have a
substantially diminished capacity for coping with the ordinary demands of life. Mental illnesses
can affect people of any age, race, religion, income, or background. Several million people in
this country are diagnosed with a serious long term mental illness. The good news about mental
illness is that recovery is possible.

Mental disorder is not defined by law, and peace officers are not required to
make a medical diagnosis of a mental disorder.
A mental disorder:
   ● is primarily a brain disorder
   ● creates problems with feeling, thinking, and perception
   ● affects a person's behavior by causing bizarre and/or inappropriate
   ● behavior
   ● can be short term (acute) or long term (chronic)
   ● can occur at any time during a person's life

Intellectual disability, epilepsy, or other developmental disabilities, alcoholism, other drug abuse,
or repeated antisocial behavior do not, by themselves, constitute a mental disorder. (WIC
5585.25)
    B. List the categories of mental illness:
            1. Thought disorders, including schizophrenia

Thought disorder is a condition where the person’s thought process is disrupted causing that
person to experience delusions, hallucinations, and/or irrational fears, or they may exhibit
unusual behaviors.


            2. Mood disorders, including depression and bipolar


 A mood disorder, also referred to as an affective disorder, is a condition where the person experiences
periodic disturbances in mood, concentration, sleep, activity, appetite, or social behavior. Mood disorders
can be marked by periods of extreme sadness (depression) or excitement (mania).


Mood disorders tend to be episodic. Between episodes the individual may have no remarkable symptoms
or difficulties.

Clinical depression is the most common of the mood disorders. It is usually recurring, often
many times in an individual’s lifetime. Symptoms may include, but are not limited to:
- Isolation
- Sadness, inactivity and self-depreciation
- Feelings of guilt, hopelessness, helplessness, or
pessimism
- Eating disturbances
- Fatigue, decreased energy
- Loss of motivation

People who are affected by bipolar disorder may experience periods of excessive energy,
reduced response to pain, or feel they require little or no sleep


            3. Anxiety related disorders
            4. Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
            5. Co-occurring/dual diagnosis disorders


C. Recognize the causes and nature of mental illness

A mood disorder, also referred to as an affective disorder, is a condition where the person
experiences periodic disturbances in mood, concentration, sleep, activity, appetite, or social
behavior. Mood disorders can be marked by periods of extreme sadness (depression) or
excitement (mania).
Mood disorders tend to be episodic. Between episodes the individual may have no remarkable
symptoms or difficulties.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


D. Recognize behavioral indicators that may be generally associated with people affected by mental
illness

Officers should not attempt to diagnose mental illness. A mental illness is often difficult for even
the trained professional to define in a given individual. Officers must be able to recognize
general indicators of mental illness so that appropriate actions can be taken.
The following table identifies several indicators that officers may consider when determining
whether a behavior is related to mental illness.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
E. Recognize appropriate peace officer response(s) and methods of communication when responding to
a call that involves a person with a mental illness

People affected by mental illness can be unpredictable and sometimes violent. Officers should
never compromise or jeopardize their own safety or the safety of others when dealing with
individuals who display symptoms of a mental illness.
Once the scene is stabilized and there is no threat to life then the officer has a duty to
reasonably accommodate the person’s disability, but not before.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43
F. Discuss the referral process and state/local resources available to people with mental illness


Several resource services are available to peace officers and individuals with mental illness,
physical disabilities, and developmental disabilities. Examples of the types of resources
available include but are not limited to the following:
   ● Agency-related assessment or crisis teams
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


    ●    Private organizations offering support groups
    ●    Substance abuse facilities
    ●    County mental health agencies
    ●    Regional developmental disabilities centers
    ●    Independent/assisted living centers
    ●    National support/information organizations such as the National Alliance for the Mentally
        Ill (NAMI)
    ● Local missions or shelters
    ● Faith-based organizations
    ● Senior citizens’ centers or dependent adult resources
NOTE: Peace officers should become familiar with the organizations that are available within
their respective regions.


G. Identify appropriate resolution options

If an officer determines that a person appears to be affected by a mental illness, but does not
meet detention action under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150 “as detailed in Chapter
5” there are several actions the officer can consider taking. The following table identifies some
of these actions.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


V. LEARNING NEED


Peace officers must become familiar with the application of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150 in
order to determine if an individual is a danger to others, or to himself or herself, or gravely disabled and to
determine an appropriate response and resolution option.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES


    A. Explain the intent of the Lanterman-Petris-Short Act (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150)
            a. The Lanterman-Petris-Short Act (LPS) was established in 1968 with the intent of
               reforming commitment laws pertaining to mental health treatment. The
               Legislature’s intent was to end the inappropriate, indefinite, and involuntary
               commitment of persons with mental health disorders, developmental disabilities,
               and chronic alcoholism.
            b. Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150 states that: when a person as a
               result of a mental health disorder is:
                   i.  a danger to others, or
                  ii.  a danger to himself or herself, or
                 iii.  gravely disabled
            c. A peace officer or other designated person may, upon probable cause take or
               cause to be taken the person into custody for a period of up to 72 hours for
                   i.  assessment, evaluation, and crisis intervention, or
                  ii.  placement for evaluation and treatment in a designated facility
    B. Recognize the authority of peace officers to take a person into custody pursuant to Welfare and
       Institutions Code Section 5150
            a. Peace officers have been given great authority to detain individuals who meet
               specific criteria in the law.
            b. Most individuals living with mental health disorders will not require peace officer
               assistance pursuant to 5150 WIC.
            c. Peace officers’ actions must be based on probable cause that a person is a
               danger to self or others, or gravely disabled due to a mental health disorder.
            d. Peace officers must also recognize that individuals in crisis can pose potential
               officer safety concerns.
            e. To establish probable cause to detain a person pursuant to Welfare and
               Institutions Code Section 5150, an officer must clearly articulate the
               circumstances under which the person’s condition was brought to the officer’s
               attention. The officer must:
                  i.     be able to state known facts
              ii.   that would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe or to
             iii.   entertain a strong suspicion
             iv.    that the person detained
              v.    is a danger to others, or self, or is gravely disabled
C. Recognize behavioral indicators peace officers may use to help determine if a person affected by
   mental illness is a danger to others, or to himself or herself, or gravely disabled
       a. Danger to others
             i.  use of words or actions that indicate the intent to cause bodily harm to
                 another person appearance of being agitated, angry or explosive (even
                 when not focused at a particular person)
            ii.  engagement in or intent to engage in acts or behavior of such an
                 irrational, impulsive or reckless nature as to put others directly in danger
                 of harm (e.g., the destruction of property or misuse of a vehicle)
           iii.  acts or words regarding an intent to cause harm to another person being
           iv.   based on or caused by the individual’s mental state which indicated the
                 need for psychiatric evaluation and treatment
       b. Danger to self
             i.  words or actions that imply an intent to commit suicide or inflict bodily
                 harm on self
            ii.  exhibition of gross neglect for personal safety which could lead to that
                 person receiving or being at risk of receiving serious injury
           iii.  statements or action implying a specific plan to commit suicide or inflict
                 harm on self
           iv.   plans and the means available or within that individual’s ability to carry out
       c. Gravely Disabled
             i.  The W & I Code defines gravely disabled as “a condition in which a
                 person, as a result of a mental health disorder, is unable to provide for his
                 or her basic personal needs for food, clothing or shelter.”
            ii.  Indicators may include, but are not limited to the following:
                      1. The person must be unable to avail themselves of food, shelter
                         and clothing.
                      2. Mere inability to provide for needs is not sufficient nor is refusal of
                         treatment evidence of grave disability.
                      3. Regardless of a person's past, the question is whether they are
                         presently gravely disabled.
D. Recognize the rights of individuals who have been taken into custody, pursuant to Welfare and
   Institutions Code Section 5150
       a. Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150 requires that prior to transporting the
          person to a designated facility, officers must give the person the following
          advisement:
            i.   “My name is (officer’s name), I am a (type of peace officer) with
                 (employment agency’s name). You are not under criminal arrest, but I am
                 taking you to for an examination by mental health professionals to (name
                 of the mental health facility). You will be told your rights by the mental
                 health staff.”
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


  E. Recognize the documentation requirements pursuant to Welfare and Institution Code Section
     5150.2
         a. Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5150.2 requires officers who transport a
            person to a designated facility for assessment under Welfare and Institutions
            Code Section 5150 to complete the written Applications for 72-Hour Detention,
            Evaluation and Treatment form (DHCS 1801). A standard application includes:
                 i.   verification that the detainment advisement was given
                ii.   the name of the designated facility to which the person is taken
              iii.    the name and address of the individual who is being detained
               iv.    factual circumstances and observations constituting probable cause for
                     the officer to believe that the individual is in fact a danger to others, self,
                     or is gravely disabled
                          1. If the person is compliant to the officer’s directions, it does not
                              mean the individual is consenting.
         b. NOTE: There is no such thing as a voluntary 5150 W & I.
         c. It is the officer’s responsibility to check agency policy for reporting policies.


LD 39 – Crimes Against the Justice System 4 hrs

 I.   Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of
      probable cause. Peace officers must know the elements required to
      arrest for crimes against the judicial process and to correctly
      categorize these crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.
         A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
         B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
              1. Intimidating witnesses or victims
                         a) PC 136.1 - the crime of preventing or dissuading witnesses or
                            victims by intimidation to testify
                         b) Crime Elements:
                                 (1) Any person who knowingly and maliciously prevents or
                                     dissuades any witness or victim from attending or giving
                                     testimony at any trial, proceeding, or inquiry authorized by
                                     law (Penal Code Section 136.1(a)(1)).
                                 (2) Any person who knowingly and maliciously attempts to
                                     prevent or dissuade any witness or victim from attending or
                  giving testimony at any trial, proceeding, or inquiry
                  authorized by law (Penal Code Section 136.1(a)(2))
      c) PC 136.1(b) - the crime of preventing or dissuading witnesses or
         victims from reporting that victimization to any peace officer
      d) Crime Elements:
              (1) Every person who attempts to prevent or dissuade another
                  person who has been the victim of a crime or who is
                  witness to a crime from doing any of the following including
                  but not limited to: 1) making any report of that victimization
                  to any Peace Officer (Penal Code Section 136.1(b)(1)),
                  causing a complaint to be sought or assisting in the
                  prosecution (Penal Code Section 136.1(b)(2)), arresting
                  the suspect (Penal Code Section 136.1(b)(3)).
      e) The crime of intimidating witnesses or victims is a misdemeanor or
         felony
      f) The mere attempt to intimidate or threaten a witness or victim is
         enough to arrest the person for the offense that was attempted,
         without regard to the success or failure of the attempt. Further, no
         person needs to be physically injured or actually feel intimidated.
      g) Example: A man went to the home of his estranged wife. An
         argument broke out and the man slapped his wife and then told
         her he would come back and “really beat you up” if she reported
         the incident to the local law enforcement. Because of his
         statement to harm her if she reported the assault, the man
         committed the crime of intimidation of a witness or victim.
2. Threats of retaliation
      a) PC 140(a)
      b) Crime Elements: Every person who willfully uses force or
         threatens to use force or violence upon the person of a
         witness to, or a victim of a crime or any other person, or to take,
         damage, or destroy any property of any witness, victim, or any
         other person, because the witness, victim, or other person has
         provided any assistance or information to a law enforcement
         officer, or to a public prosecutor in a criminal proceeding or
         juvenile court proceeding, shall be punished by imprisonment in
         the county jail not exceeding one year, or by imprisonment
         pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 for two, three, or four
         years.
      c) Misdemeanor or a felony.
      d) Example: At a trial for embezzlement, Bill testified against the
         defendant, his former business partner. Two days later, while the
         jury was deliberating, Bill received a letter from the defendant
         stating that because Bill had testified against him, the business
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                       they had formerly owned together would be “torched.” The
                       defendant committed the crime of threats of retaliation.
              3. Violating a court order
                    a) PC 166(a)(4)
                    b) Crime Elements: Any person who willfully disobeys the written
                       terms of any process or court order, or out-of-state court order
                       lawfully issued by any court, including orders pending trial.
                    c) Misdemeanor
                    d) For the crime of violating a court order to be complete, the court
                       order must:
                           (1) Have been properly served on the person, or
                           (2) The person must have been present when the order was
                               generated
                    e) Example: During a trial, the judge decided to adjourn the court
                       proceeding for a lunch break. The judge ordered the officer
                       witness who had been testifying to return after lunch for
                       examination by the defense attorney. The officer witness failed to
                       return. She committed the crime of violating a court order.
II.   Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development
      of probable cause. Peace officers must know the elements
      required to arrest for crimes that obstruct law enforcement in
      their duties and to correctly categorize these crimes as
      misdemeanors or felonies.
        A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
        B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
             1. Resisting, delaying or obstructing a public officer, peace
                officer, or emergency medical technician
                    a) PC 148(a)(1)
                    b) Crime Elements: Every person who willfully resists, delays, or
                       obstructs any public officer, peace officer, or emergency
                       technician in the discharge or the attempt to discharge any
                       duty of that officer’s office or employment.
                    c) Misdemeanor
                    d) NOTE: The fact that a person takes a photograph or makes an
                       audio or video recording of a public officer or peace officer, while
                       the officer is in a public place or the person taking the photograph
                       or making the recording is in a place he or she has the right to be,
         does not constitute, in and of itself, a violation of subdivision (a),
         nor does it constitute reasonable suspicion to detain the person or
         probable cause to arrest the person. (Penal Code Section 148(g))
      e) Peace Officer =
              (1) any county sheriff, undersheriff, or deputy sheriff
              (2) any city or district chief of police or any police officer
              (3) any marshal or deputy marshal of a municipal court
              (4) any DA investigator
              (5) any member of the California Highway Patrol.
      f) Public Officer = building inspectors, health inspectors
      g) Executive officers = peace officers, district attorneys, city
         attorneys, and police commissioners
      h) No physical contact between the suspect and the officer is
         necessary for the crime of a 148(a)(1) to exist, verbal threats or
         interference can pose sufficient obstruction for the crime to take
         place
      i) Example: A man was being arrested for stealing a bicycle that had
         been locked up in front of a convenience store. While being
         handcuffed, he broke free from the peace officer’s grip and ran
         away. The officer eventually subdued the man. Along with the
         original crime, the man committed the crime of resisting a peace
         officer.
2. Obstructing or resisting an executive officer by use of threats
   or force
      a) PC 69
      b) Crime Elements: Every person who attempts by means of threat
         or violence to deter or prevent any executive officer from the
         performance of that officer’s duties, or knowingly resists any
         executive officer by the use of force or violence in the
         performance of that officer’s duties
      c) Felony
      d) PC 69 = physical
3. Threatening a public officer
      a) PC 71
      b) Crime Elements: Every person who, with the intent to cause,
         attempts to cause, or causes, any officer or employee of any
         public or private educational institution or any public officer or
         employee to do, or refrain from doing, any act in the
         performance of their duties, by means of a threat, directly
         communicated to such person, to inflict an unlawful injury upon
         any person or property, and it reasonably appears to the
         recipient of the threat that such threat could be carried out.
      c) Felony
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                   d) Public Officers = individuals employed by governmental agencies
                      with certain specified law enforcement powers
                   e) PC 71 = verbal
                   f) Example: A college mathematics instructor found a note on his
                      windshield stating that he would be sorry if he didn’t give a
                      passing grade to a particular athlete on the school’s football team.
                      Although the instructor ignored the first note, he took the second
                      note seriously when he found it taped to a broken window of his
                      home. An officer questioned the athlete mentioned in the notes
                      and the athlete admitted that he had written the notes himself.
                      Along with the crime involving the destruction of property, the
                      young man committed the crime of threatening public officers,
                      employees, or school officials.
             4. Disarming an officer
                   a) PC 148(c) - the crime of removing or taking a firearm from an
                      officer
                   b) PC 148(d) - the crime of attempting to remove or take a firearm
                      from an officer
                   c) Crime Elements: Every person who during the commission of any
                      offense described in (Penal Code Section 148(a)(1)) (resisting,
                      delaying, or obstructing any public officer, peace officer, or
                      emergency technician) removes or takes a firearm from the
                      person or from the immediate presence of a public officer or peace
                      officer shall be punished by imprisonment pursuant to Penal Code
                      Section 1170(h)..
                   d) To prove 148(d), one or more of the following must occur:
                           (1) Holster strap being unfastened by defendant - PC
                               148(d)(1)
                           (2) Firearm partially removed from the officers holster - PC
                               148(d)(2)
                           (3) Firearm safety was released by the defendant - PC
                               148(d)(3)
                           (4) Witness corroborates that defendant intended to remove
                               the firearm and the defendant actually touched the firearm
                               - PC 148(d)(4)
                           (5) Witness corroborates that defendant actually had his hand
                               on the firearm and tried to take it from the officer who was
                               holding it - PC 148(d)(5)
            (6) Defendants fingerprint found on the firearm or holster - PC
                148(d)(6)
            (7) Physical evidence authenticated by a scientific procedure
                established the defendant touched the firearm - PC
                147(d)(7)
            (8) In the course of any struggle, the officer’s firearm falls, and
                the defendant attempts to pick it up. - PC 148(d)(8)
      e) ATTEMPTING TO, OR EVEN DOING SO, WHILE RESISTING,
         DELAYING, OR OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER IS A CRIME!! –
         FELONY
5. Removing any weapon, other than a firearm, from an officer
      a) PC 148(b)
      b) Crime Elements: Every person who, during the commission of any
         offense described in Penal Code Section 148(a) (resisting,
         delaying, or obstructing any public officer, peace officer, or
         emergency technician), removes or takes any weapon, other
         than a firearm, from the person of, or in the immediate presence
         of, a public officer or peace officer shall be punished by
         imprisonment in a county jail not to exceed one year or pursuant
         to Penal Code Section 1170(h)..
      c) Felony
      d) Example: A peace officer attempted to use pepper spray to
         subdue a belligerent suspect. In the course of the officer’s actions,
         the suspect grabbed the can of pepper spray from the officer’s
         hand. The officer was able to physically subdue the suspect
         before he could use the spray on him. By taking the officer’s
         chemical weapon, the suspect was guilty of the crime of removing
         or taking any weapon other than a firearm from an officer.
6. Attempting to remove a firearm from a public officer
      a) Same as #4 disarming an officer???
7. Attempting to escape or escaping from the custody of a peace
   officer
      a) PC 836.6(a)
      b) Crime Elements: Any person who is remanded by a magistrate or
         judge of any court in this state to the custody of a sheriff, marshal
         or other police agency, to thereafter escape or attempt to escape
         from that custody (Penal Code Section 836.6(a)).
      c) PC 836.6(b)
      d) Crime Elements: Any person who has been lawfully arrested by a
         peace officer and who knows, or by the exercise of reasonable
         care should have known that he or she was arrested, to thereafter
         escapes or attempts to escape from the peace officer (Penal Code
         Section 836.6(b)).
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                   e) Misdemeanor, unless the escape or attempted escape is by force
                      or violence and causes serious bodily injury to the peace officer,
                      then it’s a felony
                   f) Penal Code Section 836.6 does not apply to any person confined
                      to any city, county or state jail or prison
             8. Attempting to escape or escaping from a prison or other place
                of confinement
                   a) PC 4530(a)
                   b) Crime Elements: Every prisoner confined in a state prison who, by
                      force or violence, escapes or attempts to escape therefrom and
                      every prisoner committed to a state prison who, by force or
                      violence, escapes or attempts to escape while being conveyed to
                      or from that prison or any other state prison, or as delineated in
                      Penal Code Section 4350(a) while under the custody of prison
                      officials, officers or employees; or who, by force or violence,
                      escapes or attempts to escape while at work outside or away from
                      prison under custody of prison officials, officers, or employees.
                   c) PC 4530 (b)
                   d) Crime Elements: To arrest a person for the crime of attempting to
                      escape or escaping from a state prison without the use of force or
                      violence, the necessary crime elements are (Penal Code Section
                      4530(b)): Every prisoner who commits an escape or attempts an
                      escape as described in subdivision (a) without force or violence.
                   e) The crime of attempting to escape or escaping from a state prison
                      with or without the use of force is a felony.
                   f) A prisoner’s willful failure to return from temporary release, such
                      as work or education release, at the specified time is considered
                      an escape (Penal Code Section 4530(c)).
             9. Attempting to escape or escaping from a county or city jail
                   a) PC 4532
                           b)
                   10. Attempting to rescue or rescuing
                           a) PC 4550
                           b) Crime Elements: Every person who rescues or attempts to rescue,
                              or aids another in rescuing or attempting to rescue any prisoner
                              from any prison, road camp, jail, officer or person having that
                              prisoner in lawful custody
                           c) Felony

 III.   Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of probable cause.
        Peace officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to
        false information and to correctly categorize these crimes as misdemeanors or
        felonies.
              A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
                      1. Providing a false identity to a peace officer PC 148.9 (Misd.)
In order to arrest a person for presenting a false identification to a peace officer, the necessary
crime elements are: Any person who falsely represents or identifies oneself as another person
(real or fictitious) to a peace officer upon a lawful detention or arrest of the person, either to
evade the process of the court, or to evade the proper identification of that person by an
investigating officer. Misdemeanor

                    2. Falsely reporting a criminal offense PC 148.5 (Misd.)
In order to arrest a person for the crime of falsely reporting a criminal offense, the necessary
crime elements are:
Every person who reports to any peace officer, district attorney, or deputy district attorney that a
felony or misdemeanor has been committed knowing that the report is false.

                   3. Falsely reporting an emergency

To arrest a person for the crime of falsely reporting an emergency, the necessary elements are:

Penal Code Section 148.3(a) states:
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


Any individual who reports, or causes any report to be made, to any city, county, city and county,
or state departments, district, agency, division, commission, or board, that an “emergency”
exists, knowing that the report is false, is guilty of a misdemeanor

Penal Code Section 148.3(b) states:
 Any individual who reports, or causes any report to be made, to any city, county, city and
county, or state department, district, agency, division, commission, or board, than an
“emergency” exists, and who knows that the report is false, and who knows or should know that
the response to the report is likely to cause death or great bodily injury, and great bodily injury or
death is sustained by any person as a result of the false report, is guilty of a felony.

                   4. Falsely reporting a destructive device

Any person who reports to specified personnel that a bomb or other explosive has been, or will
be, placed or hidden in any public or private place knowing that the report is false, is guilty of a
crime punishable by imprisonment in county jail not to exceed one year, or pursuant to Penal
Code Section 1170(h).

 NOTE: Specified personnel can include, but are not limited to, peace officers, employees of the
media, employees of airlines or other forms of public transportation, occupants of a building,
telephone company personnel, etc. (Penal Code Section 148.1(a)).
NOTE: Penal Code Section 1170(h) provides that a felony may be served in state prison or a
county jail.

           B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
IV.    Arrest and successful prosecution depend on the development of probable
       cause. Peace officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes
       related to public disturbances and to correctly categorize these crimes as
       misdemeanors or felonies.
          A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest:
          B. Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
                   1. Unlawful assembly
                         a) PC 407
                         b) Crime Elements: Whenever two or more persons assemble
                            together to do an unlawful act, or a lawful act in a violent,
                            boisterous, or tumultuous manner, such assembly is an unlawful
                            assembly.
                         c) The crime of unlawful assembly is a misdemeanor
                      d) There is no requirement that any overt unlawful act actually take
                         place to make the assembly unlawful. If the purpose or specific
                         intent of any assembly is to commit an unlawful act, then that
                         assembly is unlawful
                      e) Unlawful act does not have to be violent
                      f) Example: The members of a garment maker’s union were on
                         strike and picketed in front of a local retail store. The group was
                         peaceful and did not block the sidewalk. The purpose of the group
                         was to inform shoppers of a certain manufacturer’s unfair labor
                         practices. Members of the group decided they weren’t getting
                         enough attention and used bull horns and amplification devices to
                         yell out their message. The noise became so loud that the store
                         owner and other merchants along the street, and residents in a
                         nearby apartment building, began to complain. The assembly
                         became an unlawful assembly when members of the group began
                         to disrupt the peace with their noise.
                2. Refusal to disperse
                      a) PC 416(a)
                      b) Crime Elements: If two or more persons assembling for the
                         purpose of disturbing the peace, or committing any unlawful act,
                         and do not disperse on being desired or commanded to do so by a
                         public officer, the persons so offending are severely guilty of a
                         misdemeanor.
                      c) Anyone who refuses or fails to disperse after being commanded to
                         do so is guilty of a misdemeanor.




LD 40 – Weapons Violations 4 hrs
LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable cause.
Peace officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to the
possession of prohibited weapons and to correctly categorize these crimes as
misdemeanors or felonies.

​A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
    Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony

   1. Possession of a prohibited weapon
         a. PC 16590
         b. Crime elements:
               i.  any person who
              ii.  manufactures or causes to be manufactured
             iii.  imports into the state
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


            iv.   sells, offers for sale, exposes for sale, keeps for sale
             v.   gives, lends, or possesses
            vi.   any weapon that has been specified within this penal code section as
                  prohibited
       c. Felony
       d. Prohibited weapons:
              i.  short-barreled shotgun
                      1. a barrel length of less than 18 inches
                      2. an overall length of less than 26 inches
                      3. Any firearm that can be assembled to fit this description (Penal
                           Code Section 33215)
             ii.  short-barreled rifle
                      1. a barrel length of less than 16 inches
                      2. an overall length of less than 26 inches
                      3. Any firearm that can be assembled to fit this description (Penal
                           Code Section 33215)
            iii.  unconventional pistol
                      1. A firearm with both of the following characteristics:
                               a. does not have a rifled bore
                               b. a barrel length of less than 18 inches or an overall length
                                   of less than 26 inches (Penal Code Section 31500)
            iv.   zip gun
                      1. A non-commercially produced weapon (i.e. not imported,
                           designed, or taxed as a firearm) capable of firing a projectile by
                           the force of an explosion or other form of combustion (PC 33600)
             v.   pen gun
                      1. A firearm enclosed within what appears to be a writing pen
           vi.    belt buckle gun
                      1. firearm mounted on, or that appears to be part of a belt buckle that
                           can be detached and used as a weapon
           vii.   cane gun
                      1. A firearm mounted or enclosed in a stick, staff, rod, crutch, or
                           similar device designed to be, or capable of being, used as a
                           walking aid and that can be fired while mounted or enclosed
          viii.   wallet gun
                      1. A firearm mounted or enclosed in a case resembling a wallet
                           designed to be, or capable of being, carried in a pocket or purse,
                           and that can be fired while mounted or enclosed
           ix.    Ballistic knife
            1. A device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of
               a coil spring, elastic material, or compressed gas. This does not
               include any device that propels an arrow or a bolt by means of any
               common bow, compound bow, crossbow, or underwater spear gun
  x.    Shuriken
            1. An instrument, without handles, that is used as a throwing
               weapon. A shuriken consists of a metal plate having three or more
               radiating points with one or more sharp edges
 xi.    Shobi-zue
            1. A staff, crutch, stick, rod, or pole, concealing within it a knife or
               blade which may be exposed by a flip of the wrist or by a
               mechanical action
xii.    Undetectable knife
            1. Undetectable knife or other instrument, with or without a
               handguard, that satisfies all of the following requirements: It is
               capable of ready use as a stabbing weapon that may inflict great
               bodily injury or death. It is commercially manufactured to be used
               as a weapon. It is not detectable by a metal detector or
               magnetometer, either handheld or otherwise, which is set at
               standard calibration (Penal Code Section 20810)
xiii.   Dirks and Daggers
            1. A dirk or dagger is:
                   a. a knife or other instrument
                   b. with or without a hand guard
                   c. capable of ready use as a stabbing weapon
                   d. that may inflict great bodily injury or death
            2. Penal Code Section 21310 states that:
                   a. any person who
                   b. carries concealed upon his or her person
                   c. any dirk or dagger
                   d. is guilty of a misdemeanor, or a felony pursuant to
                       subdivision (h) of Penal Code Section 1170
            3. The mere possession of a dirk or dagger alone is not a crime. It
               must also be shown that the weapon was carried concealed on
               the individual’s person.
            4. A dirk or dagger is not considered to be concealed if it:
                   a. is carried in a sheath which is worn openly suspended from
                       the waist of the wearer
                   b. is folded or closed and is not capable of “ready use”
                   c. consists of a cylindrical device which would have to be
                       unscrewed, turned around, and then screwed back on
                       before it could be used as a knife
xiv.    Slungshot?
xv.     Concealed explosives
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                          1. PC 19100
                          2. Crime Elements
                                  a. any person
                                  b. who carries concealed upon his or her person
                                  c. any explosive substance (other than fixed ammunition)
                          3. Felony
                          4. The mere possession of an explosive substance alone is not a
                              crime under Penal Code Section 19100. It must also be shown
                              that the explosive substance was carried concealed on the
                              individual’s person.
         e. Example: A hunter sawed down the barrel of a hunting rifle to a length of 15
            inches. Even though the overall length of the rifle was still over 26 inches, a rifle
            with a barrel length that is less than 16 inches qualifies as a prohibited weapon.
            The hunter possesses a prohibited weapon.
         f. Example: A jogger fashioned a leather strap with a stone attached to its end that
            he could carry with him in his pocket. He intended to use it as a weapon against
            any dog that tried to attack him during his morning run. The device that the man
            manufactured meets the definition of a slungshot. Although the man intended to
            use the device in self-defense, he has manufactured and now possesses a
            prohibited weapon.
         g. Example: A woman was concerned for the safety of her college age daughter
            who rode the subway to and from college classes. The woman gave her daughter
            a lipstick case that had a knife enclosed in it. By giving a prohibited weapon to
            another person, the woman committed the crime of possession of a prohibited
            weapon. If the daughter then carried the lipstick case knife in her backpack as
            her mother suggested, the daughter would possess a prohibited weapon.
  2.   Possession of an illegal knife
         a. PC 21510
         b. Crime Elements:
                i.   any person who
               ii.   possesses
                          1. on one’s person
                          2. in the passenger’s or driver’s area of any motor vehicle in any
                              public
              iii.   place or place open to the public
              iv.    sells, offers for sale, exposes for sale
               v.    loans, transfers, or gives away
              vi.    a switchblade knife (pc 21510): any person who possses in one’s person
                     in the passenger’s or driver’s area of any motor vehicle in any public
                    place of place open to the public. Sells, offers for sale, exposes for sale,
                    loans, transfers, or gives away, a switchblade, knife. With a blade two or
                    more inches in length. Poss. Of a switchblade is a misdemeanor. Not a
                    crime in privat residence or… and is a knife that has a button or flick of
                    rest that exposes blade, with a blade two or more inches in length
         c. Misdemeanor
         d. The possession of a switchblade knife is not a crime if the knife is located:
                i.  in a private residence (other than carried on a person)
               ii.  in a vehicle that is not in a public place or a place that is open to the
                    public (e.g. parked in a garage that is attached to a private residence)
   3. Unlawful possession of tear gas weapon or chemical agent
         a. PC 22810
         b. Crime Elements:
                i.  any person, firm, or corporation who knowingly:
                        1. possesses
                        2. sells, offers for sale, exposes for sale
                        3. transports
               ii.  any prohibited tear gas or tear gas weapons
             iii.   except when otherwise permitted
         c. Misdemeanor / Felony if tear gas is used for any purpose other than self-defense
         d. PC 22810 states that it is lawful to purchase, possess, or use tear gas in the form
            of an aerosol spray with a net weight of 2.5 ounces or less, solely for
            self-defense.
         e. Exceptions to the lawful possession of a tear gas weapon include any person
            who:
                i.  has been convicted of a felony, or a crime involving assault
               ii.  is addicted to narcotics
             iii.   is attempting to sell or furnish the tear gas weapon to a minor
              iv.   is under 16 years old
               v.   is 16 or 17 years old without written parental consent and not
                    accompanied by a parent or guardian (PC 22815)

B.. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for:
    Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony

          1. Carrying a firearm in a public place or within a vehicle
                a. PC 25850(a)
                b. Crime Element:
                       i.   any person who
                      ii.   carries a loaded firearm
                     iii.   on one’s person or
                     iv.    in a vehicle in:
                                1. a public place
                                2. on any public street in an incorporated city
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43


                              3. within a prohibited area of an unincorporated area
              c. Misdemeanor
              d. The crime of carrying a loaded firearm may also be classified as a felony,
                 if the person carrying the firearm:
                      i.  has a prior felony conviction Penal Code Section 25850(c)(1), or
                          of any crime made punishable by a prevision listed in Penal Code
                          Section 16580
                     ii.  knew or reasonably should have known the firearm was stolen
                          Penal Code Section 25850(c)(2)
                    iii.  is an active participant in a criminal street gang Penal Code
                          Section 25850(c)(3)
                    iv.   is not in lawful possession of the firearm Penal Code Section
                          25850(c)(4)
                     v.   has been convicted of a crime against a person or property, or of a
                          narcotics violation Penal Code Section 25850(c)(5)
                   vi.    is not listed with the Department of Justice as the registered owner
                          of the pistol, revolver, or firearm capable of being concealed upon
                          the person Penal Code Section 25850(c)(6)
              e. Loaded firearm means any firearm that has an unexpended cartridge or
                 shell in or attached in any manner to the firearm. (Penal Code Section
                 16840(b)(1)). Loaded firearm means just having the mag in with rounds,
                 mag with even 1 round, 1 round in the chamber, etc.
       2. Possession of a deadly weapon with intent to assault another person
              a. PC 17500
              b. Crime Elements:
                      i.  every person
                     ii.  having upon him or her person
                    iii.  any deadly weapon
                    iv.   with intent to assault another
              c. Misdemeanor
       3. Possession of a loaded firearm with intent to commit a felony
              a. PC 25800(a)
              b. Crime Elements:
                      i.  every person who
                     ii.  carries a loaded firearm
                    iii.  with the intent to commit a felony
              c. Felony
       4. Alteration or removal of identifying marks from a firearm
              a. PC 23900
                  b. Crime Elements:
                        i.  any person who
                       ii.  changes, alters, removes or obliterates the
                                1. name of the maker
                                2. model
                                3. manufacturer’s number
                                4. other mark of identification including any distinguishing
                                     number or mark assigned by the Department of Justice
                      iii.  on any firearm
                      iv.   without having secured written permission from the Department of
                            Justice to make such a change, alteration, or removal
                  c. Felony
                  d. Penal Code Section 23920 states that it is a misdemeanor for any person
                     with knowledge of the alteration to the identification marks of a firearm to:
                        i.  buy
                       ii.  receive
                      iii.  dispose of
                      iv.   sell or offer for sale
                       v.   possess that weapon

LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable cause.
Peace officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to unlawful
concealment of firearms and to correctly categorize these crimes as misdemeanors or
felonies.

   1. Recognize the statutory definition of a concealed firearm

Penal Code Section 16530(a) defines a pistol, revolver, and firearm capable of being concealed
upon the person shall apply to and include:
 • any device designed to be used as a weapon
• from which is expelled a projectile by force of an explosion or other form of combustion
• that has a barrel less than 16 inches in length

    2. Recognize the exceptions to the license requirement for possession of a
        concealable firearm
Penal Code Section 25605 identifies specific conditions under which a person is exempt from
the license requirement for the possession of a concealable firearm.
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43




   3. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for possession of a concealable
       firearm without a license. ​Recognize the crime classification for possession of a
       concealable firearm without a license.
The crime of unlawful possession of a concealable firearm without a license is covered under
Penal Code Section 25400.

To arrest a person for unlawful possession of a concealable firearm without a license, the
necessary crime elements are:
• any person who • carries concealed
• a firearm that is capable of being concealed (loaded or unloaded)
• upon one’s person
 • within any vehicle under that person’s control or direction
• without a license or permit A key element of this crime is that the firearm is carried concealed.

A firearm in plain view where there is no intent to conceal it would not be in violation of (Penal
Code Section 25400).
A firearm carried openly in a belt holster is not considered to be concealed. (Penal Code
Section 25400(b))




LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable cause.
Peace officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to
possession of firearms by restricted persons or within restricted areas and to correctly
categorize these crimes as misdemeanors or felonies.
A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for possession of:
Recognize the crime classification as a misdemeanor or felony
   1. A firearm by a convicted felon, narcotic addict, or other restricted persons:
      Felony Penal Code Section 29800(a)(1)

To arrest a person for possession of a firearm by a convicted felon or a narcotic addict, the
necessary crime elements include:
• any person who has been convicted of a felony
• or is addicted to any narcotic drug (Penal Code Section 29800(a)(1))
• or two convictions of (Penal Code Section 29800(a)(2))
• or offenses enumerated in Penal Code Section 23515
The crime of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon or narcotics addict, or restricted
persons, is a felony.

Felony Penal Code Section 29800(a)(1)

   2.   A firearm by a person convicted of a specified misdemeanor

The crime of possession of a firearm by a person convicted of a specified misdemeanor is
covered under Penal Code Section 29805.

To arrest a person for possession of a firearm by a person convicted of a specified
misdemeanor, the necessary crime elements are:
 • any person who
• has been convicted of a specified misdemeanor and
 • within ten years of the conviction
• owns or has possession, custody, or control of
• any firearm

   3.   An unauthorized weapon in a prohibited location

The crime of possession of an unauthorized weapon in a state or public building is covered
under Penal Code Section 171b.

The crime of possession of an unauthorized weapon in a state or public building is a felony.

To arrest a person for possession of an unauthorized weapon in a state or public building, the
necessary crime elements are:
• any person who
• brings or possesses
• a specified weapon
• within any state or local public building
• to any meeting required to be open to the public
Module I Exam: LD’s 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 25,
26, 28, 37, 39, 40, 43



LEARNING NEED
Arrest and successful prosecution depends on the development of probable cause. Peace
officers must know the elements required to arrest for crimes related to the drawing, exhibiting,
or unlawful use of weapons and to correctly categorize these crimes as misdemeanors or
felonies.

    A. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for drawing, exhibiting, or unlawful use
       of a(n):

    1.   Deadly weapon (other than a firearm)
    2.   Firearm
    3.   Firearm in the presence of a motor vehicle occupant
    4.   Imitation firearm
    5.   Loaded firearm on the grounds of any daycare facility
    6.   Firearm in the presence of a peace officer

B. Recognize the crime elements required to arrest for, and classification of unlawful
discharging of a firearm
C. Recognize the classification of crimes related to unlawful use of weapons as misdemeanors
or felonies.




LD 40 – Terrorism Awareness 4 hrs
I.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must become familiar with what terrorist threats are; the definitions, tactics, groups, and potential
 ​targets.
  ​A.​Recall the definition of terrorism
   ​B.​Identify typical terrorist tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP)
    C.​Identify domestic terrorist ideologies
    D.​Identify special interest terrorist ideologies
    E.​Identify international terrorist ideologies


II.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must become familiar with their role in preventing/deterring terrorism.
 A.​Identify the National Terrorism Advisory System
 ​B.​Recognize terrorism indicators, tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP)
  ​C.​Identify law enforcement prevention/deterrence actions
​D.​Identify public safety information sharing resources

III.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must recognize the types and significance of critical infrastructure.
 A.​Identify local critical infrastructure sectors
 B.​Identify the basic concepts of critical infrastructure protection, including:

​1.​Threats
 ​2.​Vulnerabilities

IV.​LEARNING NEED

​Peace officers must have a basic understanding of the intelligence cycle and the intelligence resources ​available to
 them.
 A.​Identify the intelligence cycle
 ​B.​Identify intelligence resources
  ​C.​Discuss Suspicious Reporting (SAR) including an introduction to the intelligence cycle
